A 
Traveller’s 
Tales
Part I
The Early Years
John Francis Kinsella
Banksterbooks
Copyright © John Francis Kinsella
2024
A Traveller’s Tales
all rights reserved
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,  
distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including  
photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,  
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of  
brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other  
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. 
First p ublished by Banksterbooks
Cover & contents designed by Banksterbooks
banksterbooks@gmail.com
SN30062024OBHe travelled widely in far places;
Wrote, and was widely read.
Soldiered, saw some of danger’ s faces,
Came home to Nettlebed.
The squire lies here, his journeys ended –
Dust, and a name on a stone –
Content, amid the lands he tended,
To keep this rendezvous alone.
Peter FlemingFor my friend James Denis HerringI  envy  those  chroniclers  who  assert  with  reckless  but  sincere  
abandon: ‘I was there. I saw it happen. It happened thus.’ Now I too,  
in every sense, was there, yet I cannot trust myself to identify with  
any  accuracy  the  various  events  of  my  own  life,  no  matter  how  
vividly they may seem to survive in recollection... if only because we  
are all, I think, betrayed by those eyes of memory which are as  
mutable  and  particular  as  the  ones  with  which  we  regard  the  
material world, the vision altering, as it so often does, from near in  
youth to far in age. And that I am by a devious and unexpected route  
arrived at a great old age is to me a source of some complacency,  
even  on  those  bleak  occasions  when  I  find  myself  attending  
inadvertently the body’ s dissolution, a process as imperceptible yet  
sure as one of those faint, persistent winds which shift the dunes of  
sand in that desert of dry Libya...
Messiah Gore VidalA Traveller’s Tales
1
s I write, there is not a corner of the world devoid of  
tourists of some kind, the vast majority of them ordinary  
people from all walks of life and every continent now able to  
afford a flight to what were once unimaginably distant lands,  
criss-crossing the globe in every direction, Westerners east to  
India and China, Asians to Europe and the Americas, Middle  
Easterners and Africans to the  great  capitals, and the  more  
adventurous travellers seeking new experiences in the African  
savannas, Patagonia, New Guinea and even Antarctica. A
How many of us have paused to admire a remarkable edifice  
or landscape, congratulating ourselves on our good fortune to  
have this unique privilege, when, suddenly a coach pulls up  
and  discharges  an  unruly  crowd  of  silver  haired  retirees  
wielding smartphones, wearing tee-shirts bearing the badges  
and  slogans  from  the  Burnley  Welfare  Association  or  the  
Aubervilliers Scrabble Club. 
Of course that is condescending, but aren’t tourists defined as  
everyone but ourselves, we who are travellers.
Over the course of history, men from civilised nations had  
only two reasons to travel—trade and war. There was of course  
diplomacy in its different forms, including Papal envoys, they  
were  cardinals, priests or other orders. But  these  were  few  
1John Francis Kinsella
compared to those who fought or traded beyond the borders of  
their own lands.
In the nineteenth centuries a new kind of traveller appeared in  
the  form  of  what  we  would  call  tourists.  They  included  
scholars,  writers,  adventurers,  young  men  and  women,  
following in the footsteps of the privileged seventeenth and  
eighteenth century travellers. Their goal was to broaden their  
education, horizons, learn another language by spending two or  
more years on the continent on what became known as the  
Grand Tour.
It was the birth of tourism and reserved for the upper classes  
of British society in the days when travel was a costly time  
consuming affair.
That all changed with the advent of air travel and the modern  
jet airliner at the end of the 1950s, which in three or four  
decades opened the world to the common man and his family.
Until that time flying was for the rich and adventurers. My  
first flight was in Chipmunk at RAF Croydon when I was  
fifteen years old. Before the WWII, Croydon was London’s  
first international airport where Imperial Airways established  
its base and launched its first luxury passenger airliner service  
with the Handley Page HP42 in 1931. On the outbreak of war,  
Croydon Airport became a fully operational frontline fighter  
airfield,  forming  part  of  No.11  Group,  Fighter  Command,  
whose  Hurricanes  and  Spitfires  defended  London  against  
Hitler’s bombers.
2A Traveller’s Tales
After  the  war  it  was  returned  to  civilian  use  and  though  
Manchester University Air Squadron was based in one of the  
wartime hangars flying Tiger Moths and Chipmunks, providing  
elementary flight training for Royal Airforce volunteers and the  
Air Training Corp cadets of which I was one.
This social revolution came suddenly in the space of a little  
more than a decade, from the mid-fifties to the mid-sixties,  
with paid holidays and jet travel. Before that time, travel for  
the  ordinary  man  came  with  military  service,  as  merchant  
seamen, emigration, or not that far back transportation to a  
penal colony in the Antipodes. The better classes discovered  
the world as administrators in the colonies or as missionaries.  
Others  were  diplomats,  officers,  scholars,  archaeologists,  
merchants, travellers and adventurers.
As  late  as  the  thirties  individual  travel  to  Turkey,  Iran,  
Afghanistan  and  India  merited  sponsorship  by  a  newspaper  
followed  by  a  best  selling  book.  The  Swiss  traveller,  Ella  
Maillart,  was  described  as  one  of  the  most  outstanding  
travellers  of  the  20th  century,  a  writer,  photographer  and  
journalist,  like  one  of  her  companions  de  voyage,  Peter  
Fleming, another traveller and writer, brother of Ian Flaming  
the creator of James Bond.
Peter, who unlike myself could count on the Old Boy system,  
was known for his adventure in the Amazon jungle,  where in  
1932 he set out as a correspondent for The Times in search of  
the ill fated Fawcett Expedition, a story which was recounted  
in  a  book,  Exploration  Fawcett  by  LT.-COL.  P .H.  Fawcett  
3John Francis Kinsella
D.S.O., F .R.G.S.1, which I discovered in my school library in  
1955, borrowed, never returned, and is in my possession to this  
day.
I visited the Matto Grosso over half a century later carrying  
the book with me, which I had rubber stamped in a jungle  
lodge, not far from Manaus where the Rio Negro meets the  
Amazon.
My  own  exploration  took  place  decades  later  in  Borneo,  
where I found myself heading a project to build a huge pulp  
mill in the heart of the rainforest for a consortium put together  
by a company owned by the Rothschild Bank.
As for Ella Maillart, one of the exotic places she visited was  
Trivandrum in Kerala, India, a few miles from Kovalam, a  
rather neglected tropical beach once popular with hippies and  
the  less  demanding  tourist  seeking  a  different  kind  of  
experience, a village where I myself spent a month some years  
back. Ella Maillart’s travels also brought her to Manchuria and  
other  corners  of  China,  today  destinations  for  tourists,  
businessmen of all ilks and students of Chinese culture and  
language. The accounts of her travels in post-Revolutionary  
Russia remain an historical document, but today almost any  
student can follow in her footsteps.
It is difficult to say what exactly drives us to travel. There is  
of course the desire for exoticism, relaxation, sunshine, white  
sandy beaches, palm trees and blue seas, but there is something  
else  that  attracts  us,  that  something  beyond  the  horizon.  
1. Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society
4A Traveller’s Tales
Perhaps it is the primitive instinct of the nomad, the hunter  
gatherer, that remains in us. In any case there are few people  
who would hesitate given the opportunity to travel beyond their  
shores.
My story is perhaps a little different. It commenced in the late  
fifties when I first ventured outside of the British Isles, nothing  
very  ambitious,  though  for  an  ordinary  eighteen  year  old  
Londoner it was a startling experience, especially when none of  
my close contemporaries, who apart from a closely chaperoned  
school holiday to Paris, had never travelled abroad.
At the beginning of 1958, like many seventeen, eighteen year  
olds, I was as naive of the world as most teenagers of my  
generation and no doubt any generation. I probably had more  
in common with Brian W Aldiss’ hero, Horatio Stubbs, than I  
would have cared to admit, as for politics I was firmly attached  
to the popular ideas the Daily Mirror represented of which I  
was regular reader and not to mention an ardent admirer of its  
scantily dressed pinups.
Immigration as we knew it in the second half of the twentieth  
century was at its beginnings, ten years had passed since the SS  
Empire Windrush docked in Southampton after its voyage from  
Jamaica carrying hundreds of immigrants to work on London  
Transport and in other jobs. 
At that time there were no Jamaicans, Indians or Africans in  
my primary school as was the case in my secondary school  
until 1954 when a couple of coffee skinned first year kids  
appeared. Then, I had an idealist’s vision of a future coffee  
5John Francis Kinsella
coloured world, ignorant of the complications it would bring in  
later decades. 
Of Mohammedans I knew nothing apart from boys’ adventure  
stories of Kitchener’s exploits in the Sudan, in fact in spite of  
our history lessons, which were more more concerned with  
Roman emperors and English kings, as for Mohammedans I  
did not even realize they still existed, and the first news that  
they did came with the Suez Crisis in 1956.
The Soviet Union occupied Eastern Europe and the threat of  
nuclear war hung over Western Europe whilst Red China was  
ruled by Mao and wracked by famine. That about summed up  
my  knowledge  of  geopolitics  and  a  time  when  school  
geography classes taught us the only world that mattered to us  
were the vast regions coloured in pinky-red.
Our text books hadn’t caught up with the ‘wind of change’  
and the independence of the ‘subcontinent’, the rest was terra  
incognita , that is apart from the USA, the land of cowboys,  
Elvis Presley and popular music, a country to which we were in  
debt for our freedom and gratitude for their assistance in our  
fight against Hitler. 
Though  the  popular  ditty  Mademoiselle  from  Armentieres  
clearly told us it wasn’t the Yanks that won the war and nobody  
was going to tell us otherwise.
* * *
It was the discovery of Italy that resolved me to do everything  
in my power to explore the world, setting me on a path that  
6A Traveller’s Tales
would lead to sixty five years of travel to every almost every  
corner  of  the  globe,  tropical  jungles,  temperate  rainforests,  
deserts, the icy wastes of Russia, mountains, islands, modern  
cities and the ruins of ancient civilizations.
I started out as a young and modest would be engineer, so  
financing  my  ambition  was  not  easy.  But  little  by  little  I  
discovered a way to travel, a way that is best described by a  
nice  French  expression:  aux  frais  de  la  prince sse,  in  other  
words paid by the firm…and in style. It was in the days before  
Internet, smartphones and instant communication, especially in  
places like the rainforests of Borneo where the only link with  
the outside world was by radio and where I discovered the  
tropical rainforest and its extraordinary diversity of life, which  
inspired my tale The Last Ancestor.
7
John Francis Kinsella
2
efore going further I should tell you something about my  
first  solo  trip  across  the  water,  that  is  without  being  
accompanied  by  an  adult,  and  a  reminder  that  all  great  
adventures start with a small step.B
     It started three months before our departure  date when my  
mother sent me to Paddington Station where I collected ‘sailing  
tickets’ for my brother Tom and myself, that is reservations for  
the  ferry  from  Fishguard  to  Rosslaire.  In  the  days  before  
computerised reservations, booking a crossing to Ireland was a  
haphazard  affair,  but  the  system  worked.  Passengers  in  
possession of a ‘sailing ticket’ were assured of a place on the  
boat  at  a  given date. These  were  free  of cost  and allowed  
passengers to buy their train and boat tickets at a later date.
Tom and I, respectively thirteen and fourteen years old, set  
off on our journey to Ireland from Paddington at the beginning  
of July on a British Railways train drawn by a  powerful coal  
fired  steam  locomotive.  The  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  
journey into the night took five or six hours before we arrived  
in Fishguard Harbour on the south coast of Wales. There we  
boarded the St David, a British Railways ferry, for the sixty  
mile passage across the Irish Sea to Rosslare , in the County of  
Wexford , where we would take a local train to our grandparents  
in Enniscorthy.
8A Traveller’s Tales
However, it was far from being my first journey across the  
Irish Sea, the first took place in 1939, in my mother’s womb,  
when she and my father left the puritan Irish Free State, not yet  
declared a republic, for London, a young unwed couple, soon  
after the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlin declared  
war on Nazi Germany.
A few short months after I was born, my Aunt Peggy, my  
father’s  eldest  sister,  carried  me  to  the  safety  of  my  
grandparents  in  Enniscorthy,  anticipating  the  Blitz,  there  I  
stayed until 1944 when I returned to London in the belief the  
worse was over, which was unfortunately not the case.
In the years that followed the war, we, my brother Tom and I  
holidayed in Enniscorthy in the company of our parents, but  
now in the summer of 1954, we travelled alone for the first  
time. Our parents had given us money for a couchette, but after  
boarding  the  ferry  we  decided  it  could  be  better  spent  in  
Ireland. The sea was calm and there was no reason waste good  
money on sleeping during the  night  crossing when there was  
plenty to see on what was to us a huge ship.
It must have been  well  past midnight when the ferry finally  
pulled out with Tom and I leaning over the rail as the harbour  
lights  gently  slipped  past,  then  as  we  reached  the  harbour  
beacon we began to feel the heavy swell  of the sea .
The wind rose and we made our way inside. The lounges  
were packed with women and children, the ir  men folk  at the  
bars  quaffing  Guiness  and  smoking  Woodbines  or  Players  
Navy Cut. The  heat of the ship’s engines invaded the stairways  
9John Francis Kinsella
and corridors , stench  of diesel oil and seawater to which  the 
nauseating  odour  of  vomit  was  soon  mingled  as  the  ship  
heaved it’s way through the heavy sea 
The St David crossing the Irish Sea
Soon the blinking lights of the coast faded as we sailed into  
one of those violent  summer storm s, typical of the Irish Sea.  
Unable to stand the heat and the smell of beer, cigarette smoke  
and vomit, we  made our way out  onto deck where  where we  
sought a corner to protect us from the lashing rain and spray.  
10
A Traveller’s Tales
Soon we were puking and vomiting, believing our last hour  
was at hand.
It was six in the morning when the ship docked in Rosslare  
Harbour, a dismal sight . We were sodden and  continued to  
vomit as our stomachs were seized by reflex ive spasms, as we  
were pointed towards the northbound train  consisting of  four 
old-fashioned  carriages  and  an  almost  toylike  steam  
locomotive .  After an hour the train finally pulled out in the  
direction  of  Enniscorthy  where  after  another  hour  we  were  
greeted by our paternal grandfather and Aunty Peggy.
Market Square Enniscorthy 1954 , not much traffic
Cars were even rarer in Enniscorthy than England in those  
days as can be seen from the Market Square postcard above,  
and buses non-existent. Our suitcases were not heavy and we  
made our way on foot over the  stone  bridge across the Slaney  
River, up Slaney Street  and across the Town S quare , past the  
green,  along  Parnell  Road,  finally  arriving  on  Pearse  Road  
nearly half an hour later where our Granny was overwhelmed  
by the joy of seeing two of her London grandchildren. Little  
11
John Francis Kinsella
did she know what was in store as she hugged the two sodden  
waifs, myself still wrenching though my stomach was long  
since emptied of the sandwiches I had eaten on the train after 
leaving  Paddington.
Enniscorthy Station 1954
Once we were dried a  full breakfast was set out on the living  
room  table  with  good  Irish  bacon,  eggs,  black  pudding,  
homemade Irish bread and fresh country  butter.
Market day in Enniscorthy was an extraordinary thing for a  
couple  of city lads, cattle,  cows,  sheep, pigs , chickens  and  
tractors on the green. A little further away was the greyhound  
racing track where a weekly event was held and where the  
local breeders could show off their champions.
In those days Ireland was still poor and to our astonishment  
many of the local  lads could not afford shoes.
Curdled milk for bread making was delivered to our granny’s  
by a horse drawn  cart and the milkman ladled it out from an  
urn into her bowl at the garden gate.
We visited our Aunty May in Blackwater, a small village by  
the sea, whenever we could get a lift. I remember the Humber  
12
A Traveller’s Tales
car that brought us there , where we played in the endless sand  
dunes.
Our summer holiday was marked by our trip to Dublin at the  
beginning of August to see the All Ireland Hurling semifinal  
with  our  granddad.  The  train  with  the  same  quaint  steam  
locomotive and wagons that had greeted us in Roslaire a few  
weeks earlier, straight out of the Wizard of Oz, brought us to  
Dublin, Amiens Street Station, from where we made our way to  
O’Connell Street, where we were told the story of the 1916  
uprising and the battle for the Post Office. 
In those days O’Connell Street was dominated by Nelson’s  
Pillar, which was destined to be blown up five or six years later  
by Irish nationalists, and of course Clerys where my mother  
had worked before the war.
We took a bus to the mythical Croke Park which was packed  
for the match between Wexford and Antrim. Beyond the local  
derbys we had watched at the sports ground in Enniscorthy it  
the first time we saw a first class match. It was in the days well  
before TV had reached Irish homes and even back in London it  
was barely a year since we had our first TV set at home.
After the match we visited an ancient aunt in a large red brick  
house  in  the  district  between  Croke  Park  and  Dublin’s  
Connelly  railway  station,  before  returning  to  Enniscorthy.  
There we drank tea and ate freshly baked scones and Irish  
bread spread with hot butter and homemade strawberry jam.
13John Francis Kinsella
3
hree years later, in July 1957, Harold MacMillan  told us  
we’d never had it so good. It caused a lot of laughter and  
jokes, but it was probably true. Twelve years had passed since  
World War II had ended and Britain’s economic miracle was in  
full swing. T
    We were slowly becoming more prosperous. The proof was  
in my own modest wardrobe, where my Burton suits were very  
slowly being replaced by those of Sam Arkus, a Soho tailor, I  
had discovered on Berwick Street on one of my many lunch  
time walks. There I could choose ‘with it’ fashionable cloths,  
be measured and fitted…and of course pay by instalments, in  
advance. Sam was no slouch, he was inventive, and since he  
did not entirely trust the words of the prime minister, at least as  
far  as  the  permanence  of  his  young  clients  prosperity  was  
concerned, payment was upfront.
It was a time when I was just discovering that the firm was  
willing to pay for me and my costs to travel around the country.  
Our  customers  were  mostly  paper  manufacturers  and  we  
designed various processes to improve their production.  These  
processes  were  custom  built  and  required  the  visit  of  an  
engineer to take dimensions on site. The engineer naturally  
needed someone to hold the other end of the tape and note the  
measurements, and I as a trainee was often designated to fulfill  
14A Traveller’s Tales
this job, and on occasions, for the simplest of tasks, was sent  
alone, as far as Wales, the North of England and even Scotland.
Getting out of the office was great and visiting the country  
with the firm’s money in my pocket to pay for expenses was  
even better. From time to time in the company of the engineer,  
my section leader, we motored through the West Country to  
visit clients in his Morris Minor, a four or five hour journey  
winding  though  towns  and  villages,  before  motorways  and  
trunk roads were invented. Often we stayed at our clients’ very  
comfortable guest houses, a practice long forgotten today. I still  
remember enjoyable evenings watching the sun go down over  
the  rolling  Welsh  countryside,  the  nearby  hills  dotted  with  
grazing sheep, as we drank beer at the Bridgend Paper Mills’  
bar  before  being  served  dinner  at  the  table  in  their  very  
pleasant guest house. 
It must have been early in 1958, when James Denis Herring,  
‘Jim’ to his friends, dreamt up the extraordinary idea that we  
should go abroad for our summer holidays. Up to that point in  
time  we  had  holidayed  in  Ireland,  at  our  respective  
grandparents,  though  the  previous  year  I  had  varied  the  
tradition by going fruit picking in Cambridgeshire with another  
friend, Pickles.
Though Jim and myself were of very different characters we  
had a lot in common. Firstly, we were both Catholics of Irish  
descent, myself more so than Jim, whose father was English,  
both my parents were Irish and I could claim that I was at least  
conceived on the Emerald Isle. We lived in Pimlico, attended  
15John Francis Kinsella
the Holy Apostles and attended Westminster Cathedral Primary  
School.
Pimlico,  a  small  and  in  many  ways  privileged  residential  
district of the City of Westminster, lay at the very heart of  
London. In the fifties it floated in a kind of transitional limbo  
as the city set about rebuilding itself after being extensively  
damaged by bombing during the war. 
The socially mixed population of Pimlico, of ten or fifteen  
thousand, was composed of the privileged, such as those who  
lived in Morpeth Mansions, where Winston Churchill had once  
resided  during  his  ‘wilderness  years’ between  the  wars,  or  
Dolphin Square, and ordinary folks lived in Peabody Buildings,  
Millbank Estate, and the newly built Churchill Gardens which  
housed many families who had seen their homes destroyed  
during the Blitz. There were also the grand Victorian homes on  
Ecclestone Square, St George’s Drive and St George’s Square  
built by the Marquess of Westminster and Thomas Cubitt that  
had been transformed into flats where the social mixity was  
less clearly defined.
The  major  landmarks  were  Victoria  Station,  Westminster  
Cathedral,  Westminster  Hospital  and  the  Tate  Gallery,  and  
borders were defined by the royal parks, Westminster Abbey  
and Buckingham Palace. 
Apart from the war years, when as a young child I was sent to  
Ireland  to  live  with  my  grandparents  in  Enniscorthy,  my  
neighbourhood was Pimlico, where I arrived from Ireland in as  
the summer of 1944. My parents thinking the worse was over  
16A Traveller’s Tales
as the war neared its end, had me brought back to London  
where  they  lived  on  Cumberland  Street.  Once  home  I  was  
enrolled at St Vincent’s Convent School, next to Westminster  
Cathedral, less than fifteen minutes walk from where we lived. 
Unfortunately for us the war was far from over. One day just  
before lunchtime our street was devastated by a V1, Hitler’s  
equivalent  of  a  modern  cruise  missile,  filled  with  high  
explosives,  which  Londoners  called  ‘doodlebugs’.  We  were  
lucky to escape with cuts and heavy bruises. As we emerged  
from the cellar, transformed into a shelter, we were met with a  
scene of desolation, the house in which we lived was totally  
destroyed, apart from a few walls, leveled to the ground, as  
were all the neighbouring houses. Pimlico was hard hit during  
the war because of its proximity to Battersea Power Station,  
just across the River Thames, and Victoria Railway Station.
We  were  evacuated  to  Wales  due  to  the  evident  lack  of  
accommodation  in  the  district,  returning  to  London  shortly  
before the war’s end. 
In 1947, I started at Westminster Cathedral Primary School  
on Great Peters Street and my lifelong friend ‘Jim’ Herring  
joined  shortly  after.  He  was  introduced  to  my  class  one  
morning as a new boy, who could not have passed without  
being remarked. He was thin, fragile, his hair bright red and his  
pale skin covered with an ocean of freckles. ‘James Herring  
will be joining your class,’ announced Mister Holdsworth, our  
headmaster. Herring seemed like an improbable name to us.
17John Francis Kinsella
Ten  years  later,  Jim  explained  his  improbably  plan  for  a  
continental holiday, a seemingly impossible idea, but Jim was  
full of ideas and persisted, explaining how it worked, it covered  
transport, hotel and meals, the expression ‘all included’ was not  
yet invented. 
I had to agree, it sounded great as the previous year’s fruit  
picking holiday had not been a memorable success. Housed in  
ex-army Nissen huts, wooden dormitories, together with a gang  
of  cheerfully  raucous  Yorkshire  miners  of  our  own  age,  
somewhere  near  Wisbech,  an  unremarkable  Cambridgeshire  
town, where I never discovered where the fruit was picked. 
Most of our ‘holiday’ was spent in a local coffee bar listening  
to Paul Anka singing ‘Diana’ on the Jukebox. I had saved for  
the  two  weeks  and  had  sufficient  pocket  money,  besides  I  
didn’t feel like messing up my suit and shoes in some muddy  
field.
The flat damp Cambridgeshire fens were not the ideal place  
for a summer holiday and the fruit picking camp was a dismal  
place. So Jim’s idea of a continental holiday was undeniably  
exciting. With only two weeks annual holidays I had decided I  
would not risk another dreary break. The only obstacle was the  
money. A Sam Arkus suit cost sixteen pounds and an all-in  
holiday between twenty five and thirty pounds, plus spending  
money and accessories. With four pounds a week it meant I  
would have to do some serious if not impossible belt tightening  
as far as my weekly budget was concerned.
18A Traveller’s Tales
As a rule, each weekend between midday Friday and Monday  
morning  most  of  my  four  pounds  evaporated.  Cigarettes,  
cinemas, coffee bars and payments on my suits, not forgetting  
the occasional shirt, tie and shoes, made short work of my  
budget. I barely had enough to eat lunch on Mondays not to  
mind the rest of the week. The result was I starved, through my  
own fault. 
My mother’s trust, I could manage my money, was sadly  
misplaced and as a result I often went without meals and ate  
nothing before ten in the evening when I came home after night  
classes at the Regent Street Polytechnic.
The Regent Street Poly now the University of Westminster 
Between the office closing time and the start of classes at the  
Poly I rarely had enough money to pay for a cup coffee, but  
that was the price to pay for splashing out on the weekends.
Were they good times? I suppose they were. Office hours at  
Carrier-Ross Engineering were from nine in the morning until  
19
John Francis Kinsella
five thirty on the dot in the afternoon. Even Sands the director  
was gone within ten minutes or so after the rest of us had left, I  
knew  having  worked  overtime  searching  for  lost  technical  
plans and blue prints in the archives stored in a cellar under the  
pavement on Cavendish Street.
There was little worry about finding a job in those days. We  
joked that  the  job interview at  the  engineering design firm  
consisted of a single question: ‘Can you hold a pencil?’ If the  
answer  was  in  the  affirmative,  the  applicant,  if  he  looked  
reasonably presentable had the job, and that wasn’t far from  
being true. Fifty years on the same job would require multiple  
interviews and a university degree.
It  April  1957,  the  government  announced  its  intention  to  
officially end military service. This came into effect December  
31, 1960, and only those born before September 1, 1939, were  
to be called up together with those who had been deferred  
because  of  studies,  apprenticeships  or  for  other  reasons.  I  
escaped by the skin of my teeth. I had become used to seeing  
those older than I disappear from the office to do their two  
years service, not all of them returned on completion, which  
favoured my own continuous training and advancement.
That obligation out of the way, removed a major point of  
interrogation and left the road ahead clear to plan for the future.  
For almost twenty years all young men had been obliged to  
interrupt their studies or career to serve in the armed forces and  
it seemed like something natural and unavoidable. 
20A Traveller’s Tales
In 1956, still wearing my white coat, I had been sent to the  
post office on Wimpole Street with an urgent package and was  
laughingly mocked by the garbage collectors, whose truck was  
passing, ‘Your white coat won’t save you from being called up  
for  Egypt!’ The  news  had  just  broken  British  and  French  
paratroops  had  jumped  on  Suez  to  secure  the  Canal  from  
Egypt’s  newly  elected  leader  Gamal  Abdul  Nasser,  whose  
intention was to nationalise it.
I suppose I was lucky and like the others in the engineering  
firm  we  believed  Sands  when  he  told  us  that  even  if  our  
salaries were less than flash in the pan businesses we had a job  
for life and could count on the firm. Fifteen years later he had  
retired and the world was already a different place, the firm  
was absorbed into a larger group where his forgotten words  
meant nothing. Myself I quit Carrier-Ross when I was twenty  
three for a much better paid position in a similar, but more  
dynamic  company,  near  to  the  Natural  History  Museum  in  
South Kensington, but more of that later.
21John Francis Kinsella
4
n  the  meantime,  the  summer  of  1958  seemed  to  go  on  
forever and it was not until the very last day of August, a  
fine Saturday morning, Jim Herring and I walked to Victoria  
Station, each carrying our worn and not very heavy suitcase  
freshly labelled with a Thomas Cooks ticket. The station, a  
dark and grimy Victorian monument as the days of the steam  
engine finally drew to an end, not far from Churchill Gardens,  
was an easy ten to fifteen minute walk down Lupus Street and  
past a couple of walled-off bombed sites on the corners of  
Claverton and Denbigh Streets.I
Victoria Station 1958
Our  shiny  new  blue  passports  and  travel  vouchers  were  
firmly tucked in the inside pocket of our jackets, we were  
dressed as if for a Saturday evening out: suit, shirt, tie and well  
22
A Traveller’s Tales
polished shoes. As we arrived on Wilton Road a I caught a  
whiff of the sour smell from the Stag Brewery that hung in the  
air whenever a breeze blew from that direction. As we walked  
passed the windows of steaming cafés we went through our  
check list for the hundredth time, then passing the bug’utch  as 
we  called  the  Biograph  Cinema  on  Wilton  Road2,  finally,  
opposite  the  New  Vic,  and  turning  into  a  side  entrance  to  
Victoria  Station,  my  excitement  rose  a  few  notches,  the  
bustling atmosphere and the noise of trains told me that the  
most exciting event of my life, the moment I had waited for  
over the previous months, had finally arrived and the gnawing  
anxiety  of  breaking  a  leg  or  getting  run  as  the  great  day  
approached the great day abruptly evaporated.
We looked around for Brian Carlyle and Roger Wright in the  
mixed  crowd  standing  guard  over  their  islands  of  baggage  
stacked in piles near the gates of platform 6, where the ten  
o’clock  Folkestone-Boulogne  boat  train  was  waiting.  There  
was  a  tinge  of  apprehension  as  we  checked  our  fellow  
passengers out. What kind of people were they? Were they like  
us? Would we be in the same compartment as them?
At that time Britain was still a very visibly class society,  
something  that  was  instantly  evident  from  the  attitudes  of  
people  and  their  accents.  We  were  inner  Londoners,  not  
Cockneys, though to anyone from outside of London we were.  
We were amongst those families who were privileged to live in  
the very heart of London with all the advantages that gave us  
for the future. 
2   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kj5257uXh2g
23John Francis Kinsella
London-Paris in six hours on the Golden Arrow in 1958 
Until I started work I had never been really aware of this  
though I knew upper class people were different to us. None of  
those who worked at Carrier-Ross lived in Central London,  
most of them lived in suburban districts, and certain, to my  
lasting  chagrin,  mocked  the  fact  that  I  lived  in  Churchill  
Gardens considering themselves a cut above me socially.
We spotted our two friends, they were dressed like us in their  
best suits and ties, talking to a Thomas Cooks’ representative.  
We joined them and our presented our travel vouchers that  
were checked against a list and pronounced to be in order and  
were given the number of our carriage and compartment. We  
then  passed  the  next  forty  minutes  before  the  train  left  
excitedly chattering and joking, as Jim and myself, frequent  
travellers  to  Ireland,  related  our  experiences  on  trains  and  
ferries. 
24
A Traveller’s Tales
It was still early days for air travel to Paris, the vast majority  
of people still travelled by rail and the better off on the first  
class only Golden Arrow, just over six hours between the two  
capitals, leaving at eleven on the platform next to ours. There  
was no first class for us, something that was far from our  
considerations. 
The Folkestone train was filled with tourists like ourselves  
who had booked their holiday with Thomas Cooks and other  
travel agencies. The travel agent’s representative pointed us to  
our carriage and compartment reservation once the gate opened  
and we surged towards the waiting train. Each carriage had a  
paper sticker marked Folkestone Docks and its number. Once  
in our compartment and our suitcases stowed on the overhead  
rack and we took up position in the corridor with the windows  
down waiting for the whistle.
Six months had passed since Jim Herring had hatched his  
plan for a summer holiday abroad and Rimini was chosen from  
a pile of catalogues collected from travel agencies in Victoria  
Street. Twenty six pounds all in, train, hotel and full pension in  
an albergo  just two minutes from the beach.
The whistle blew and the carriage shuddered to the sound of  
couplings clanking as the steam locomotive strained and the  
train slowly pulled out of the vast gloomy station blackened by  
decades of soot. Rolling towards the Thames, passing Churchill  
Gardens, then barely ten years old, its bright yellow bricks  
marking  a  sharp  contrast  with  those  of  the  ancient  grimed  
Peabody Buildings, rumbling across the river, past the power  
station on the left and Battersea Park on the right, towards  
25John Francis Kinsella
Clapham Junction. There we left behind our familiar landmarks  
as we turned towards the south-east through London’s dismal  
rundown suburbs with their endless rows of dirty brick houses  
and sad back yards. 
Our journey had began as we four lads stood in the corridor  
out side of our compartment watching the jumble of low lying  
nineteenth century urban landscape slip by on the first leg of  
the journey. It took the best part of an hour to break out into the  
green Kent  countryside, puffing through the  cuttings in the  
rolling  chalk  hills  to  Folkestone  Docks  where  the  cross  
Channel ferry was waiting at the quayside. 
We were young Londoners, barely out of school, who had  
never  travelled  abroad,  our  scant  knowledge  of  European  
geography was limited to wars and Italy where Julius Caesar  
came from. As for the Adriatic coast and Rimini, those were  
new and exotic words. 
Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly were the idols of the day, and  
in the UK Skiffle was all the rage whilst John Lennon, Paul  
McCartney and George  Harrison were  young and unknown  
Liverpudlian would-be-musicians, part of a quintet known as  
the Quarrymen.
We too had formed a group which we called The Bachelors:  
guitars, a tea chest bass and a washboard. There were five of  
us,  though  only  one  had  the  barest  idea  of  how  to  play  a  
musical  instrument.  We  played  Lonnie  Donnegan  with  the  
Rock Island Line and other Skiffle hits. 
26A Traveller’s Tales
After weeks of practice and giving hell to the neighbours we  
called in one of the parish priests to immortalise our sound on  
his tape recorder. The dismay on his face when we launch into  
our  number  spoke  for  itself.  Our  failure  to  provide  a  
convincing  performance  did  not  however  deter  us  from  
accepting the invitation to play at a party where the drinks were  
supplied and to compensate for the lack of enthusiasm on the  
part of the guests we got slightly smashed and the host ending  
up by forcefully suggesting a disc jockey take over.
That summer ‘Come Prima’ and ‘V olare’ were the hits and  
conjured up a magical image of Italy in our minds each time  
they  were  played  on  the  BBC,  the  offshore  pirate  Radio  
Caroline was yet to be invented, and the BBC with its state  
monopoly BBC made sure we only heard what they thought  
was good for us. 
To see us through our two weeks in Rimini, it was Roger  
Wright who had the most spending money with him, more than  
foreign  exchange  regulations  permitted,  the  amount  being  
stamped in the back of our passports by the bank. Jim Herring  
and Brian Carlyle had about twenty five pounds each and I just  
eighteen, five of which I borrowed from my dad just before  
leaving for Victoria Station. It was a lot of money considering  
that my wages were just four pounds a week.
At  Folkestone,  hanging  firmly  onto  our  suitcases,  we  
followed the crowd through passport control and customs to  
the gangway of the Maid of Orleans ferryboat. I felt queasy at  
the smell of the sea and fuel oil, remembering the terrible Irish  
Sea crossing to my grandparents in Ireland. My last visit had  
27John Francis Kinsella
been  four  years  before  with  my  brother  Tom,  a  nightmare  
crossing  in  a  violent  storm  accompanied  by  the  smell  of  
Guinness, cigarette smoke and vomit. 
I couldn’t help recalling my arrival in Enniscorthy with my  
brother  Tom  four  years  earlier,  a  one  hour  train  ride  from  
Rosslare Harbour, still in the grip of involuntary heaving even  
though my stomach had been emptied hours before on that  
terrible night when it seemed that the entire ship was seasick.
Scanning the English Channel, to my relief no more than a  
light scattering of white puffy clouds decorated the sky, drifting  
slowly past over a calm grayish-green sea, no sign of squalls or  
choppy weather, the late summer sunshine looked as though it  
would hold. 
As instructed we left our suitcases at a designated spot and  
headed for the bar where we bought tea and sandwiches. Duty  
frees did not exist apart from the drinks that could be bought  
for consumption on board. There was a kind of camaraderie in  
the air, after all most of the passengers were holidaymakers like  
ourselves, some would be heading for Paris and the Riviera,  
others like ourselves would join the train at Boulogne for Italy.
Across the waters the French coast was a barely discernible  
grey line, in one hour our adventure would really commence,  
starting with the promise of Italian sunshine, beyond that we  
knew nothing. In those days Spain was still underdeveloped  
and  few  tourists  dared  confront  the  miseries  of  the  Franco  
regime. Beyond the Mediterranean, France was embroiled in  
the Algerian war of independence. To the east the Soviet Block  
28A Traveller’s Tales
was at the height of its power after having launched its Sputnik  
and where Nikita Khrushchev had just been elected as First  
Secretary of the Soviet Supreme. 
Italy’s nearby neighbour was Communist Yugoslavia, ruled  
by Josip Broz Tito, where tourism was still a far off concept. To  
the  south  was  Greece,  which  had  elected  Constantine  
Karamanlis and his National Radical Union Party for a second  
consecutive  term,  a  country  far  beyond  reach  of  the  vast  
majority  of  would-be  UK  tourists,  where  the  Cyprus  
Emergency, as it was called,  found the British, Greeks and  
Turks in a bloody struggle over the future of the island. 
As for the rich, the first transatlantic jetliner service had just  
begun between London and New York with the ill fated British  
Comet, the world’s first jetliner. It was the death knell for the  
great transatlantic passenger liners such as the Queen Elizabeth  
and Queen Mary, the fate of which was sealed forever with the  
introduction of the Pan Am Boeing 707 a couple of months  
later on October 26, 1958.
* * *
At  that  time  I  was  a  lowly,  poorly  paid,  trainee  in  the  
engineering design office situated on a corner of Cavendish  
Square in the West End of London. Perhaps lowly was not the  
exactly word as it was a good job, which though I did not  
realise it at the time augured a promising future for a lad who  
had grown up in the heart of London in a modest Irish Catholic  
family, which didn’t prevent the pay from being a miserly four  
pounds a week. 
29John Francis Kinsella
     I had left school early, to the chagrin of my headmaster,  
and after an interim period at the Army & Navy Stores on  
Victoria  Street,  I  found  a  real  job  with  Carrier-Ross  
Engineering in their design office where I was employed as a  
trainee  with  the  obligation  to  attend  classes  to  study  
engineering at the Polytechnic, just a five minute walk away  
from  the  office,  situated  on  Upper  Regent  Street,  almost  
opposite the BBC’s iconic headquarters.
That four pounds was almost all blown away at the weekend,  
little  was  saved  and  to  pay  for  the  holiday  my  friend  Jim  
Herring, an apprentice electrician at the London Underground,  
found us a weekend job. Jim was inventive and working for  
London  Transport  had  more  worldly  friends  than  I  at  the  
engineering office.
As a Roman Catholic I was explicitly part of a minority at the  
secondary  school  I  attended.  Partly  due  to  the  fact  it  was  
Church of England, with daily morning assemblies, prayers and  
hymns.  My  family’s  Pimlico  parish  priest,  Father  Hadfield,  
looked on my enrolment at North Paddington Central School  
dimly, warning me to have myself excused from prayers, which  
I did, and together with Jim Herring and four or five Jewish  
schoolmates we created havoc in a side room as the school  
assembly sang Jerusalem and prayed to the King of England’s  
Protestant Saviour.
Slowly  attitudes  changed  and  soon  a  non-denominational  
assembly was invented, though many of the teachers seemed to  
bear a prejudice against the Irish, who were readily identified  
by  their  surnames,  their  ‘Papist’  Catholicism  with  their  
30A Traveller’s Tales
pronounced desire  for ‘apartheid’, and the  negative  attitude  
against all that was Irish which prevailed in England at that  
time.
Once  ‘Berti’ Bartholomew,  our  history  teacher,  posed  the  
question  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  catholic.  Feeling  
responsible for providing an answer and to defend my Catholic  
origins I struggled to form a reply. The fact was I had no idea  
what in meant. I was saved by Chris Hayes, the only other  
Catholic  boy  in  my  class,  who  firmly  announced  it  was  
universality, a discovery for me.
Apart from the upper class haunts, night clubs in the West  
End and Soho at that time were few and far between. They  
were often shady dives that paid badly and hand to hand. It was  
in one of the better ones, a jazz club that Jim found a job as a  
cloakroom attendant. The Americana Club, just off Piccadilly,  
was run by Rikky Gunnell and a certain Tony Harris.
Anything that was American was all the rage, and an all night  
session at the Americana, including a three-course meal, cost  
ten shillings at the Mapleton Restaurant. The restaurant was  
situated at street level and the jazz club in a large basement  
function room with a bar. Gunnell’s younger brother Johnny  
was the compère and two or three modern jazz groups took  
turns on a low stage at providing the music.
Gunnell was a hard nut, an amateur boxer who donned the  
gloves at the age of fifteen, but had never made it to becoming  
a pro. He worked in the Smithfield Meat Market during the day  
and as a club doorman at the night where he was befriended by  
31John Francis Kinsella
Tony Harris, manager of the Mapleton Hotel just off Leicester  
Square. 
The jazz club was mostly frequented by Black American GIs  
in London from nearby airbases for the weekend. The club in  
addition to good music offered reasonably priced drinks and  
food as well as a place where they could pickup girls, hang out  
all night, and save the expense of a hotel room.
The entrance to the club lay down a side street, a few yards  
further  down  than  the  Mapleton.  There  was  also  a  broad  
stairway inside that led from the restaurant to the lower level  
and a lobby where the washrooms were situated and where a  
double door led into the jazz club. I was hired as ‘bouncer’ to  
prevent the restaurant’s inquisitive clients from entering the  
club, or clubbers who knew the dodge from ducking into the  
club for free.
It was an easy job, most people when informed it was private  
simply  continued  to  the  washrooms  or  returned  to  the  
restaurant, that is until one evening when I let a very tall Black  
GI inside after he had explained he was looking for a friend.
A couple of minutes later Rikky Gunnell appeared and asked  
me who the guy was. When I told him he replied I was paid to  
stop people from entering the club and to get the guy out. In  
spite of my fear it was not difficult and after politely insisting I  
showed the American to the door.
Just as I was feeling relieved the GI’s head appear over the  
rail  of the  stairway and said, ‘Hey! Snowball, I’ll  see  you  
tomorrow morning when you come out!’
32A Traveller’s Tales
The  next  morning I sent  Jim  to check-out  the  side  street  
before I left the club.
I was paid a pound a night until the barman quit and I was put  
on  the  bar  where  I  made  a  bit  more  with  tips  plus  a  few  
shillings fiddled from the takings. Jim had a better deal on the  
cloak room where he made more on tips. 
There were plenty of shady characters some of whom offered  
Jim  money  to  give  them  a  good  coat,  which  of  course  he  
refused as the owner of the coat that disappeared would not  
easily swallow the idea his coat had being given to the wrong  
ticket holder or had been stolen.
Another source of money was buying and selling cigarettes  
and whisky from the PX. The PX was the Post Exchange on  
US military bases, where personnel could buy goods at special  
tax free prices. So a carton of Lucky Strike or Camel was  
bought by servicemen for a few shillings, sold to us for a  
pound, and sold by us to our friends in the office with up to  
fifty percent profit, much lower of course than the price of  
cigarettes  bought  in  shops  and  besides  American  cigarettes  
looked class compared to run of the mill English cigarettes like  
Rothemans.
33John Francis Kinsella
5
t was about half an hour before we caught our first real sight  
of the French coast and for near on another hour our eyes  
remained fixed on the shore as the details slowly unfolded. At  
first  glance  nothing  seemed  very  different,  but  then  as  we  
docked the subtle differences became visible. The dockers in  
their bleu de travail, then came the smells, different, Gaulois  
cigarettes, wine and coffee. I
We filed down the gangway and headed towards the controls,  
and after a peremptory stamp in our passports we were pointed  
by a guide to a waiting train. It was different from the British  
Railways  train,  the  carriages  seemed  bulkier.  We  had  a  
compartment to ourselves. Then after an interminable wait we  
finally pulled out of Boulogne Harbour through the outskirts of  
the town. Everything looked different, the colours, the curious  
shapes of French cars, we saw nothing of the town centre and  
in  the  space  of  ten  or  so  minutes  we  were  heading  in  a  
southerly direction across the immense but uninteresting flat  
landscape of Flanders towards Paris, where we turned east in  
the direction of Switzerland.
It must have been around four in the afternoon when we  
started  to  feel  thirsty  and  hungry.  Two  of  us  were  sent  to  
forage. It was half an hour before Roger returned with Brian  
Carlyle who with his schoolboy French had bought a bottle of  
Vichy  Spring  Water  with  a  Lightening  stopper  attached  by  
wire. It had cost a small fortune and was bitter to our taste,  
34A Traveller’s Tales
undrinkable. Sandwiches were equally as expensive. After a  
long discussion I went to the toilet with Jim and we topped up  
the  bottle  from  the  tap  and  took  it  back  to  the  restaurant  
changing it for a bottle of French beer.
By  evening  time  we  had  become  used  to  our  new  
environment and lassitude set in as the train rattled into the  
night and with nothing more to see, one by one, we fell asleep  
thirsty and hungry, but not before attempting to use all the  
space we had available in the compartment to stretch out for  
the night, which included the luggage racks. Roger clambered  
up to test one of the racks, but unfortunately the string netting  
was not strong enough and the cross bars too hard, so we made  
the best we could of the seats.
It was well into in the night when the Swiss passport control  
officials made  their way through the  carriage  stamping our  
passports whilst a Swiss locomotive was coupled to our train. 
A couple of hours later we halted in a place called Brig,  
where exactly was not clear as our geographical knowledge did  
not extend to Switzerland. An hour later we were on our way  
again and were soon passing through the Simplon Tunnel, then  
the longest rail tunnel in the world, and crossed into Italy at  
Domodossola. Once again the locomotive was changed. An  
interminable wait amid the noise of shunting and the clanking  
of couplings and grinding of points. 
At some point I must have fallen asleep and was awoken by  
the cold and light as dawn broke, looking around the others  
were still sleeping. Then, looking outside I was greeted by the  
35John Francis Kinsella
most spectacular scenery I had ever seen in my life, dark blue  
lakes surrounded by lush meadows and high mountains. 
The train snaked through one tunnel after the other, cut into  
the side of the mountains, alternating darkness and brilliant  
light from a clear blue sky. The colours were brighter than any  
other colours I had ever seen. The dark green pines, the colours  
of the mountains, their peaks capped with snow, which with the  
sky all formed the astonishing landscape of the Italian Alps and  
what I later learnt was Lake Maggiore.
We had no breakfast and had no idea where we were apart  
from the fact we had crossed into Italy. We had no idea how  
long more the journey would last. The train was painfully slow  
and though we did not realize it we were heading towards  
Milan avoiding the city centre, stopping and starting as we  
were diverted along secondary tracks. There were inexplicable  
and endless stops. The day wore on as our stomachs protested  
against  the  forced  fast.  Listlessly  we  watched  the  Italian  
country side slide past, morning became afternoon, and the  
afternoon evening. 
The journey had become a never-ending test as we passed  
through industrial towns and flat uninteresting countryside. The  
images  of  the  holiday  brochures  faded  and  unvoiced  
disappointment began to set in. The beaches and palm trees  
were nowhere to be seen.
It  was  past  midnight  when  we  finally  arrived  in  Rimini  
Station after a seemingly endless journey of more than thirty  
six hours. The night was velvety warm, but we were hungry,  
36A Traveller’s Tales
exhausted and beyond care. The tour operator’s representative  
bundled us into a black and yellow Fiat taxi and once the driver  
was instructed to drop us off at our hotel he left the station  
driving through a maze of dark and deserted streets.
Albergos in Rimini
Just as our deception was setting in we emerged from the  
gloom and found ourselves in a line of cars and scooters at a  
brightly lit junction, then turning right we were suddenly on an  
avenue bustling with life. To our great astonishment the shops  
were open.  We wound down the windows as the taxi edged  
forward watching people dressed in summer shorts strolling by  
or pausing to look at the shop windows, many were eating ice  
cream and others were drinking and laughing in gaily lit bars  
that  opened  onto  the  street.  The  colours  were  startling  
compared to the grey London scenery we were used to. Music  
and unfamiliar sounds greeted us. 
37
John Francis Kinsella
As we moved forward I saw the flames licking out from what  
I  later  discovered  was  a  pizza  oven.  The  passers-by  were  
tanned  and  seemed  to  glow  with  health  and  prosperity,  
seemingly part of a race totally unknown to us. We passed palm  
trees, the first we had ever seen, neon lights flashed the names  
of bars and restaurants. Scooters driven by smiling young men  
strangely  wearing  sunglasses,  their  girlfriends  riding  side-
saddle, wound in and out of the traffic.  The crowd grew denser  
and more animated. Street sellers proffered their wares, ice-
cream, fruit, postcards and suntan oils. We stared agog, it was  
as  though  we  had  suddenly  arrived  in  an  earthly  paradise.  
Although it would be another couple of years before Fellini’s  
film appeared on London’s cinema screens, ‘La Dolche Vita’  
was already there in Rimini.
Ten minutes later were dropped off at the Albergo Allegro  
where uniformed maids took our bags and we were designated  
rooms on the second floor overlooking the Viale Regina Elena.  
After our suitcases we delivered to our rooms we were directed  
to the dinning room where a late diner awaited us.
The Albergo Allegro was a recently built five storey hotel  
catering for summer vacationers, it was brightly lit, clean and  
modern, though there was no lift. The restaurant personnel and  
the room maids wore uniforms and were efficient although they  
spoke little or no English. It was not complicated the menus  
were set so there were few questions to be asked.
The next morning we stepped into an entirely new world.  
Brilliant  sunshine  and  temperatures  we  had  only  ever  
experienced on the warmest of English summer days. The air  
38A Traveller’s Tales
buzzed  with  excitement  and  after  breakfast  we  set  out  to  
explore Rimini. Our first idea was to find the beach and as little  
English was spoken in the hotel we were directed to the beach  
by  signs  and  gesticulations.  First  we  prepared  ourselves.  
Dressed in suits, shirts, ties and city shoes we headed off in the  
direction indicated with our swimsuits rolled in towels under  
our arms, as though we were heading for a lunchtime swim at  
the Marshal Street Baths in Soho, on a damp London weekday.
Rimini after 1958
The beach wasn’t more than a five minute walk from the  
albergo  and  what  we  discovered  couldn’t  have  been  more  
different compared to Brighton’s beach or those of the other  
English  south  coast  towns  we  had  been  used  to.  Over  the  
following two weeks we fell into a daily routine, arriving early,  
soon after breakfast, at the broad sandy beach, making our way  
to the water’s edge past the lines of neatly laid out tents. 
39
John Francis Kinsella
Each morning we were greeted by the same freshly raked  
golden sand, set out with deckchairs and parasols to within just  
a few yards of the gentle waves of the Adriatic, which left  
relatively little space for us to mark out our territory with the  
hotel towels.
Yours truly in foreground, behind me Roger,  
and to my right Jim with dark glasses
Soon  ice  cream  sellers  were  passing  with  their  cries  of  
‘Gelati, gelati,’ as we studied the paddelos waiting at the waters  
edge.
We anticipated the Beatles by several years in our appearance  
that  first  morning  where,  after  selecting  our  spot,  we  went  
through the gymnastics of changing in a scene that must have  
resembled  Rowan  Atkinson’s  antics,  our  towels  around  our  
40
A Traveller’s Tales
waists as we hopped on one foot to get our trousers off and  
struggled into our swimsuits fearful of displaying our whiter  
than white backsides to the amused onlookers.
Once  suitably  attired  we  flopped  down  onto  our  towels  
spread out Southend fashion on the sand to survey the scene  
before testing the water, four thin ghostly white eighteen year  
olds, dropped from the sky amongst the sleek bronzed Italian  
and German tourists who had already staked out their claims on  
the sand. 
In 1958, there were few overweight Germans and even fewer  
overweight  Italians.  Decades  of  war  and  austerity  had  
indirectly produced a race of almost Olympian grace.
Within a day or two Jim and Roger with their unabashed  
openness  were  soon  chatting  to  our  beach  neighbours,  two  
English couples along with a couple of girls, comrades in arms  
in foreign parts. One couple in their late forties and the others  
around thirtyish. 
It was on the third day when Bert pointed to a group a few  
yards from us. ‘Germans,’ he said. We were taken aback, it was  
the first time we had seen the enemy in flesh and blood, and  
Bert pushed the point home by recounting his wartime exploits.
41John Francis Kinsella
6
urope as we know it now was a far off dream in the minds  
of men such as Robert Schuman. Border crossings were  
an adventure, currency exchange controls were the order of the  
day. Even locomotives, as we had observed, were changed as  
trains crossed frontiers. We of course took that for normal, we  
had never known anything different, in fact we never knew  
much beyond the world presented to us by the Daily Mirror, or  
the Daily Express, and at best the BBC with its monopoly of  
serious world broadcasting news.E
Jim and I did not strike up an immediate friendship at school,  
it was only when we commenced as young altar boys at our  
parish church we really got to know each other. There at the  
Holy Apostles Catholic Church, on Claverton Street in Pimlico,  
every Saturday morning, under the stern supervision of Father  
Hadfield, we learnt by rote the responses for the Latin mass,  
and as a recompense for our efforts we were rewarded with  
foreign  postage  stamps  and  soon  became  enthusiastic  
collectors.  This  soon  became  our  leitmotiv  for  the  weekly  
morning rendezvous at the small church, a chilly pre-fabricated  
building  constructed  from  asbestos  panels  following  the  
destruction of the original building hit by a bomb during a  
heavy German air raid in 1941. It wasn’t until years later the  
church  was  rebuilt  on  Cumberland  Street  on  the  bombsite  
where our house had stood before it was destroyed towards the  
end of the war.
42A Traveller’s Tales
The Holy Apostles was the focal point for the many devote  
Catholics in the area, and my mother, as well as the mothers of  
many other youngsters, saw it as a social event, dressing up in  
their best on Sunday mornings for the ten o’clock mass, taking  
up their places in the front rows whilst the men crowded in at  
the back, standing throughout the service ready to be off for a  
smoke outside or to a nearby pub with their pals after the mass.
That friendship between Jim and I was sealed forever when  
we started secondary school together in Paddington and years  
of toing and froing on the 46 bus from Buckingham Palace  
Road to Harrow Road.
Later we were members of the Westminster Cathedral Youth  
Club, which met, in a hall on the cathedral grounds, every  
Tuesday and Thursday evening, where we socialized with other  
young Catholics, its raison d’être, and danced to the latest hit  
records. 
The  girls  wore  long  high  waisted  tube  skirts  and  tight  
sweaters their breasts held high by push-up bras. Our hair was  
swept back in Elvis style, some of the lads wore boxy drape  
jackets  and  a  few  sported  thick  soled  suede  shoes  that  we  
called ‘bumpers’.
Outsiders, especially those with a Teddy Boy look were not  
admitted. A good many of the youngsters were from Ireland,  
but we made friends with Roger Wright and Brian Carlyle who  
were Londoners like ourselves. Saturday evenings the four of  
us met  at  a  local  dance  hall  in Strutton Ground where  we  
danced to the music of Charlie Mack’s Band, often meeting at  
43John Francis Kinsella
the Finnegan’s Wake pub, a few doors down from the dance  
hall, a pub made famous as the place where Harry Secombe  
and Peter Sellers planned the legendary radio programme ‘The  
Goon Show’.
As far as popular music was concerned it was a transition  
period. One Saturday evening with my friend Pickles we were  
in the West End where we watched Terry Dene at the 2i’s, a  
live music coffee bar situated in a basement on Old Compton  
Street in Soho. Dene, a couple of years older than us, was a  
rock sensation, who it was announced had just returned from  
the USA, he sung like Elvis Presley, moved like Elvis Presley  
and had the confidence of Elvis Presley, better than anything  
we had ever seen.
His performance astonished us, a real live rock star, and to  
top it all ‘home made’.  Unfortunately for him, his career soon  
skidded  off  the  rails,  like  Elvis,  Dene  was  called-up  for  
National Service, at that time the world was plunged into the  
Cold War and the Red Army stood at our door in occupied East  
Germany. 
To  complicate  things  the  rising  star  married  a  popular  
starlette, a promising young actrice of the British cinema, Edna  
Savage. The army didn’t go down well with Dene, he was  
arrested for public drunkenness and vandalism then discharged  
from  the  army  on  psychological  grounds  and  his  marriage  
broke-up. 
Terry Dene had been one of the most promising rock and  
rollers of pre-Beatles Britain, and for us, seventeen at the time,  
44A Traveller’s Tales
to see a real TV pop star perform live with a rock group in a  
West End club would be a talking point for a long time to  
come.
Charlie Mack’s or the Chelsea Town Hall were the standard  
of the day for Saturday night live music, with a conventional  
band, brass, bass, percussion and a singer cum compère, all  
numbers were  either waltzes, foxtrots or some  more  exotic  
ballroom steps. Jiving or rock and roll was forbidden except  
during  the  band’s  break  when  records  were  played,  fifteen  
minutes or half an hour’s of rock and roll music.  Better was a  
lunch time session at the Lyceum Ballroom, but that was to  
records…the word disco had not yet been invented.
Brian Carlyle seemed to be the most staid of us four lads, he  
worked  for  an  insurance  company,  and  Roger  Wright  who  
worked for an auctioneers near Covent Garden, certainly the  
wildest, often encouraged by Jim who delighted in provoking  
trouble.
In  Rimini,  Italian  ice  cream,  which  was  just  making  its  
appearance in London, came in all flavours and colours, it was  
delicious as were the huge peaches that were sold individually  
from  displays  unlike  any  we  had  ever  seen.  We  never  got  
around to drinking Italian espresso coffee, it would have been  
pointless to beer drinkers, and not only too strong to our taste,  
the thick brew in the bottom of a tiny cup seemed like a waste  
of money to us.
It took us a little time to get used to Italian lira, a crazy one  
thousand four hundred to the pound, funny money, however we  
45John Francis Kinsella
soon got used to converting hundreds and thousands as we  
bought Ambre Solaire suntan oil, postcards and drinks. 
Towards the end of our stay I became more interested in  
spending my money on more permanent souvenirs than beer  
and invested in a watch that I bought for the equivalent of three  
pounds. It looked great, but by the time I had arrived home it  
was already falling to pieces. I also bought a pale blue v-neck  
pullover  in  fine  wool  that  went  nicely  with  my  suntan.  
Unfortunately for me, at the first wash the colour ran and the  
soft wool turned into a sad shapeless sack.
My disappointment with the quality of my Italian purchases  
did  not  prevent  me  from  buying  a  Lambretta  scooter  the  
following year, following Jim’s lead, as usual. We paid one  
hundred and forty three pounds for our sparkling new red and  
off-white scooters and unwittingly joined the Mods, which was  
a dress style rather than any of the other things attributed to it  
by the press in search of sensation. 
We  dressed  in  Italian  style  suits,  short  jackets,  tapered  
trousers, and pointed shoes. Jim was more conventional as was  
Brian whilst Roger tended towards exaggeration with a hint of  
the Rocker in his dress style and haircut.
The Rockers were the successors to Teddy Boys, wearing  
tight jeans and leather jackets, their hair combed in Elvis style  
quiffs. They had an exaggerated reputation for violence, and  
whilst our district, Pimlico, was very quiet, fights were not  
uncommon between gangs in the East End and at the Elephant. 
46A Traveller’s Tales
Pimlico was a small mixed central London enclave. It was cut  
off  from  the  rest  of  the  capital  by  the  broad  swathes  of  
historical  buildings,  monuments,  parks  and  institutions,  
including  the  Houses  of  Parliament,  Westminster  Abbey,  
Buckingham Palace, Green Park, Chelsea Barracks the home of  
the Guards as well as the River Thames on its south flank.
We probably owed a lot to this isolation, which we of course  
found normal. It was our stomping ground with forays into  
Westminster Abbey when we were at junior school where our  
visits were the nightmare of the beadles in the days before  
mass tourism, terrorism and metal detectors. At the age of ten  
or eleven I sat on the Coronation Chair, set over the Stone of  
Scone, and with the help of my schoolmates I lifted the huge  
heavy double edged sword out of its socket before abandoning  
it  on the  hallowed flagstones of the  Abbey floor when the  
angry beadle appeared along the cloister. Today we would have  
made the news headlines and been portrayed as young vandals  
rather than the somewhat harmless unruly kids we were.
Soon  after  our  Italian  adventure,  men’s  fashions  turned  
Italian, perhaps it was something to do with the popularity of  
Hollywood  stars  like  Dean  Martin  or  Cine  Citta’s  Silvana  
Mangano and Gina Lollobrigida. It was like that I became one  
of Sam Arkus’ younger clients and ordered a handmade Italian  
suit, which in retrospective was one of the best styled tailored  
suits  I  ever  bought.  It  was  clearly  Italian  though  not  
exaggerated, the cloth was fine with dark and somewhat less  
dark blue stripes. It was cut perfectly and was highly admired  
by my friends both inside and outside of the office.
47John Francis Kinsella
Incredibly it still exists
It was not until three or so years later that I left the Mods  
behind  as  my  style  graduated  to  something  more  original  
buying my first smart American Ivy League suit at Cecil Gees  
on Shaftsbury Avenue.
V olare was the hit song in 1958, which came third in the  
Eurovision  song  contest,  followed  by  Come  Prima.  It  was  
Italy’s year for music and everywhere we went in Rimini those  
hits  echoed.  After  a  week  of  exploring  we  ended  up  each  
evening, like good British tourists, drinking beer at the Interbar  
with our friends from the beach, something we could have  
done back home for less money. 
48
A Traveller’s Tales
Myself, I was neither a pub goer nor a regular drinker, my  
experience with alcohol was not a reference, especially at the  
parties  Jim  threw  when  his  parents  were  absent.  On  two  
occasions I became blind drunk on cheap wine and whisky,  
running wild in their flat. Pubs, pub conversations and pub  
culture never appealed to me, as for English beer it reminded  
me of soapy water.
Rimini was a shop window for Italy, new buildings seemed to  
have sprung up everywhere, fine new roads filled with shiny  
cars and scooters, foreign tourists were flocking to the resorts  
of the Adriatic, everything confirmed the country’s post-war  
prosperity.  In  spite  of  our  imagined  British  superiority  and  
prejudices concerning Italians and their supposed lacunas, the  
evidence of their success stood there before our eyes. Earlier  
that summer Amintore Fanfani’s Christian Democratic Party  
had  won  the  Italian  elections  and  he  became  premier,  his  
government would fail six months later as Italian governments  
would  regularly  do  so  for  decades  to  come  without  any  
apparent harm to the functioning and prosperity of the country. 
Italy exported its Fiats and Vespas all over Europe riding on  
the wave of post-war reconstruction and the economic miracle.  
The Treaty of Rome had been signed in 1957, with the promise  
of a new Europe, and Italy’s low-valued lira and competitive  
wages promised Italians a glowing future.
The vision of the world we had been taught at school and by  
the BBC was outlived, a new Europe was rising up before us as  
the British Empire slowly slipped into history. Just a year later,  
my impressions of Europe would be reinforced during a three  
49John Francis Kinsella
week  journey  through  France.  If  Westernised  Oriental  
Gentlemen  commenced  at  Calais  they  certainly  had  a  few  
things to teach us.
Those questions were however far from our minds as we  
explored Rimini’s old town with its Roman monuments and its  
neighbouring beach resorts to the south, Riccione and Catolica,  
not forgetting the ancient and independent Republic of San  
Marino,  half  an  hour’s  bus  ride  inland.  There  we  got  our  
passports stamped and paid a tax at the frontier before the bus  
climbed up to the capital of the city state, perched on a hilltop  
that  dominated  the  surrounding  hills  of  the  Apennines,  a  
landscape scattered with olive groves and vineyards. In the  
warm  sunshine  we  mingled  with  the  crowds  of  tourists  
exploring the historical centre of the city with its easy going  
medieval  atmosphere,  its  narrow  streets  and  alleyways.  Of  
course we ignored the museums and places of cultural interest,  
focusing  our  attention  on  the  souvenir  shops,  ice-cream  
parlours and the spectacular views from the ramparts.
We had added another country to our knowledge of the world  
and felt wiser for it, another story to tell our families, friends  
and office pals when we returned to London.
50A Traveller’s Tales
7
sed  to  English  family  food,  the  Albergo  was  a  
bewildering  experience  for  us.  Lunch  and  dinner  
commenced with vermicelli soup or salami and mortadella. For  
us the soup seemed like dishwater with the Albergo evidently  
economising on the vermicelli. This was followed mostly by  
pasta dishes, the monotony broken by risotto or veal, finishing  
with ice cream or a slice of flan. What else could have been be  
expected after the train journey had been paid for and Thomas  
Cooks had taken their cut? In any case it seemed to us we ate  
nothing but pasta.U
As for myself I was not an amateur of Italian food, at least as  
I had experienced it up to that point in time. The local café,  
where the gang from the office went to lunch, was a three  
minute walk away from Cavendish Square, on the corner of  
John Princes Street and Great Castle Street. The midday fare  
was bangers and mash, shepherds pie, or spaghetti bolognaise  
and vienna schnitzel. The café was inexpensive, catering to the  
office crowds and workmen. It run by Italians, as were a great  
number of cafés and restaurants in central London at the time,  
whom we generally looked upon as greasy dagos. I always  
stuck to the English food after having tested the London-Italian  
version of the cook’s homeland cuisine.
Brian was the most reserved, but not as far as girls were  
concerned, his goal was to get a girl into bed before the holiday  
came to an end. However there was the language barrier and  
51John Francis Kinsella
Italian girls would have nothing of English tourists. We fell  
into a routine and each evening after diner up we headed for  
the Interbar where we met our new from friends from the beach  
to drink beer, the two Northern couples and two girls. The girls  
though friendly kept a safe distance from us, that is until one  
evening we met them in the Interbar after a few beers Brian  
made a break through and walked one of the girls back to the  
hotel. That was about as far as he got though he pretended  
otherwise. 
On our journey home, we changed trains in Milan, where  
with a three hour wait we set off to explore the city. The first  
thing that astonished and puzzled us was the just completed  
Pirelli Building and its thirty two floors. How come there was  
no such building London, the centre of the world, the centre of  
the British Empire, or what was left of it? How come the ‘Ities’  
had built such a magnificent structure? The only explanation  
was there must be something wrong with it, it was an anomaly.  
As for myself it was a crowning proof that an exciting world  
existed beyond the shores of Britannia.
The following Monday morning I returned to the office on  
Cavendish Square, nut brown, wearing my new £3, though  
already  faulty  wrist  watch  and  my  powder  blue  v-neck  
pullover. The other lads in the office thought I was a star, and  
Dave Farrow, a newly engaged junior, confided to me some  
years later that he thought I was rich!
Italy was a talking point for weeks and months to come,  
whenever  I  could,  I  turned  the  conversation  to  the  Rimini,  
recounting my stories of another world, a place where in my  
52A Traveller’s Tales
mind’s eye the sun shone every day, year round, an eternal  
playground.
Many  years  later  on  a  late  autumn  business  trip  to  Italy,  
making a detour, I drove through Rimini and discovered a sad  
grey windswept landscape and a deserted sea front, even the  
ghosts of summer had gone. I couldn’t help feeling a sense of  
disappointment, in spite of the fact my travels by then had  
taken me around the world many times and to many really  
exotic lands and long since learnt how in Europe the summer  
inevitably  comes  to  an  end,  the  tourists  go  home  and  the  
shutters come down. 
There remains however a happy memories of my first trip  
outside of the British Isles.
* * *
That was a memorable year and not only for me. In 1958 Elvis  
was  drafted  into  Uncle  Sam’s  army.  The  first  Sputnik  was  
launched  with  Nikita  Krushchev  as  Premier  Secretarty  of  
USSR. Pope John XXIII was crowned 262nd pontiff of the  
Roman Catholic Church. We went to see The Bridge on the  
River Kwai, proof of the Brits glory in adversity. Britain’s first  
motorway opened that year, there was no speed limit, and one  
of the younger engineers at Carrier-Ross, Ronny Gould, trying  
out  the  new  motorway,  saw  his  Austin  A35  practically  
disintegrate under him somewhere short of Birmingham.
In  the  background  the  ‘ban  the  bombers’ organised  the  
Campaign  for  Nuclear  Disarmament  and  a  march  to  
53John Francis Kinsella
Aldermaston,  where  twelve  thousand  demonstrators  fought  
with  the  police  in  protest  as  the  less  politically  aware  
youngsters invented the Hand Jive. 
It  was  also  the  start  of  mass  travel,  slowly  at  first  then  
accelerating  over  the  next  decade.  Back  during  the  thirties  
travel  was  mainly  for  the  rich,  colonial  administrators  and  
soldiers. Travellers mostly fell in the first category, the rich and  
wealthy. Tourists were those who had been sneered at by the  
elite since Thomas Cook’s inaugural group tours in the 19th  
century and who fell into a classification John Flinn defined in  
his  San  Francisco  Chronicle  column,  ‘among  the  status-
conscious, the word  tourist  has come to mean  anyone who  
travels in a style I consider inferior to the way I like to think I  
do it.’ Evelyn Waugh’s definition was a little different, he said,  
‘the tourist is always the other chap.’
Today everybody is a tourist unless he has a second home in  
the place where he arrives, and even that is not sufficient since  
where my second home is situated, in the Basque Country, I am  
still defined as a tourist.
We are all tourists. We only have to look at the ancient graffiti  
Greek and Roman visitors carved on Egyptian temples. To my  
mind a tourist is however someone who is where he is for  
simply pleasure, whether it is on a beach, in a bar, or rubber  
necking  cathedrals,  temples,  museums  and  natural  sites  
remarkable for their beauty or their rarity. The traveller on the  
other hand is more of a thinker, his goals include enriching his  
knowledge  of  the  world,  its  history,  culture,  languages  and  
54A Traveller’s Tales
people, seeking perhaps an explanation for our traditions and  
beliefs. 
In  1958,  we  were  definitely  tourists;  we  had  little  if  any  
interest  in  history,  culture,  foreign  languages  or  Italians.  
However, the experience awakened my own interest in history  
by discovering the monuments of ancient Rome in their home  
settings and through my first timid steps in discovering the  
pleasure  of  another  language  beyond  my  rudimentary  
schoolboy  French,  repeating  the  musical  sound  of  Italian,  
counting cinque mille, cinque cento, cinquanta cinque.
My knowledge of languages at that time was limited to three  
years of elementary French at North Paddington School, which  
ended when at the age of fourteen I was channelled into the  
technical section where the language was dropped. I suppose it  
was by a curious quirk of fate when years later I went to live in  
France and naturally became fluent in the language, possibly  
the only person from my years at that school who became truly  
proficient  in a  foreign language. I must  admit  my level  of  
French could be judged by the fact I was barely in the first half  
of my class, though I did develop a real curiosity about scripts  
and languages from an early age, stimulated by my encounter  
with Latin as an altar boy and a growing interest in foreign  
lands and history.
My first contact with Italy was through my dad, during the  
late forties and early fifties, who was sent to Italy by his firm,  
specialized  in  dairy  machinery,  refrigeration  and  bottling  
equipment, for the installation of the dairy plant they exported.  
His post cards and the things he brought back had an exotic air  
55John Francis Kinsella
about them, small things, panettoni (an Italian Christmas cake),  
matches, cigarettes, newspapers and clothes. Then we received  
letters from the friends he made there, some of them even came  
to visit us in London. He started to learn Italian and his interest  
in the language continued for some years with text books and  
dictionaries appearing in different corners of our home.
* * *
As the fifties came to an end, London started to undergo a  
transformation with stark contrasts between the old and the  
new. In a certain sense we in Pimlico lived in a privileged  
cocoon, isolated from the great mass of Londoners that lay  
beyond the belt of government, establishment and the historic  
London that surrounded us. 
We knew nothing of the East End, the furthest I had ever  
ventured was the Tower of London and Tower Bridge, on foot,  
through Westminster and the City. What lay beyond was a no-
man’s-land. The same went for the other side of the river, that  
is south of the Thames, with the exception of Battersea Park,  
where those we encountered of our age, from Battersea and  
Clapham, we considered roughs and yobs to be avoided. To the  
east beyond Chelsea was Fulham, which had few attractions for  
us. The north of London was far away, well beyond Hyde Park,  
Notting Hill Gate and Edgware Road.
We had gone to school in Paddington and were of course  
familiar with Harrow Road, Elgin Avenue, where I watched  
Queen Elizabeth II ride past in her Rolls Royce shortly after  
her  coronation,  and  the  part  of  Maida  Vale  around  the  
56A Traveller’s Tales
Paddington Recreation Ground where we went to play football  
and cricket. However, apart from going to school there, we  
knew little else of the district and had little to do with our  
classmates who lived a thirty or forty minute bus ride from our  
homes.
The districts beyond Notting Hill and Marble Arch we simply  
observed from the top deck of the number 46 or 36 buses that  
took  us  daily  from  our  homes  in  Pimlico  to  school  in  
Paddington. Hyde Park and more specifically the Serpentine  
were the limits of our territory to the north. 
My  only  encounter  with  a  family  living  outside  of  our  
enclave was with that of Pickles’, a lad of my age I had met at  
the  Army  &  Navy  Stores  on  Victoria  Street,  who  was  an  
apprentice  engraver  in  the  printing  department.  His  family  
lived in Fulham and were real Londoners, as opposed to mine  
and a good number of our friends who were Irish and Catholic.
In the late fifties and early sixties a vast programme was  
undertaken  to  raze  last  vestiges  of  Victorian  pre-war  
Westminster  to  make  way  for  modern  office  buildings  and  
homes and many of our familiar landmarks disappeared.
57John Francis Kinsella
8
hose two weeks in Rimini marked my life. The only thing  
I thought of besides sex was my next visit to explore the  
outside world and the opportunity was not long in presenting  
itself.  Lou  Devos,  or  more  precisely,  Lucian  Henri  Marcel  
Devos, as his passport announced, was sufficiently impressed  
by the accounts of my exploits in Italy to suggest we go to  
France together the following summer on his motorbike.T
Lou’s parents were French. They had left France to join de  
Gaulle in 1940, and had never returned. Lou spoke perfect  
French,  but  had  only  visited  the  country  on  one  or  two  
occasions when he was a lad. Having dual nationality he had  
feared compulsory military service in France with its colonial  
wars  in  Vietnam  and  Algeria.  He  had  avoided  compulsory  
military service in the UK for medical reasons, but feared the  
less discerning French authorities. Finally to his great relief he  
was declared unfit for service and was free to holiday in France  
without being arrested.
Lou sat across the aisle from me in the office. He was three  
years older than I and considered himself God’s gift not only to  
women,  but  also  to  the  firm  and  many  other  things.  His  
reputation for exaggerated meticulousness made him the butt of  
a good many jokes. Our friendship was limited to the office as  
he lived in Orpington, Kent, and I lived in town, a fact he used  
58A Traveller’s Tales
to provoke me on occasions as he was a suburbanite living with  
his parents in their own home and I was a Londoner living with  
my parents in our rented flat. 
On  one  memorable  occasion,  his  needling,  to  his  great  
surprise, even got him a left hook on the jaw sending him  
reeling across his drawing board. My surprise was even greater  
as I did not get one back.
Our holiday plans slowly took form as Lou worked out the  
details. His 500cc single cylinder Norton Manxman was to  
transport  us  to  the  Côte  d’Azur.  If  Bob  Wright,  our  office  
section leader, had made the same trip a couple of years earlier  
with his wife, Ivy, on their 125cc Vespa scooter, it would be a  
cake walk for us on a powerful large cylinder motorbike.
We  prepared  a  list  of  material  needed  for  the  journey  
including a tent, as we intended to camp. In addition to Lou’s  
other qualities, he was so tight he squeaked when he walked,  
which was a good thing for our budget. He had calculated we  
could do the seventeen days for twenty five pounds since we  
planned to include the August bank holiday for the extra days it  
gave us beyond our statutory two weeks.
The list included a crash helmet for me, which I borrowed for  
a couple of quid from one of the chaps in the office. It was old  
and had a crack in it, but we figured out it gave the minimum  
necessary protection. As for protection against the weather Lou  
had a leather jacket and I had to do with wind cheater and a  
plastic anorak.
59John Francis Kinsella
Our total baggage was limited by the Norton’s two side racks  
and what could be fixed behind the seat, which was not much  
for two people as the small tent took up a large part of the  
space available.
 Norton Manxman 500cc 1951
We  disembarked  in  Calais  on  a  Friday  evening  in  early  
August. Lou was not used to driving on the right-hand side of  
the road and found the roundabouts difficult to manoeuvre. I  
remember as we made our way through the town being struck  
by the bright colours of everything, yellows, reds and blues,  
different from home which was so near.
As darkness fell we finally pitched our tent for the first night  
on the side of the road somewhere to the north of Abbeville.  
Contrary to our expectations we had not found a camping site.  
Not only were we hungry, but it was cold and damp as a heavy  
mist  descended  over  the  countryside  around  us.  The  next  
morning  we  were  awoken  by  the  sound  of  heavy  trucks  
60
A Traveller’s Tales
rumbling past and discovered we were just a few feet from the  
roadside. We shivered with the cold as we folded the tent and  
strapped it onto the Norton before setting off to find a place for  
breakfast.
It was a village café with one large table around which sat  
truckers, the local postman and other early risers. Lou ordered  
breakfast in fluent French as I inspected the café. A smell of  
Gauloises cigarettes, wine and coffee hung in the air.  Coffee  
with  tartines , that is to say buttered French baguette, it was  
delicious and welcome after the bitterly cold damp night in our  
flimsy tent. I was astonished to see truckers eating steak and  
chips and drinking white wine at seven in the morning. 
We skirted around Paris and headed south towards Lyons  
where  the  weather  improved  considerably.  That  night  
somewhere near  Montélimar  we followed a sign ‘Camping’  
and  found  ourselves  before  an  ancient  eighteenth  century  
maison de maitre  where we were invited to install our tent in  
the garden. We were the only campers. Diner was served in a  
front room that was furnished from the same period as the  
house, a somewhat sinister atmosphere reigned as the soup was  
served by the master of the house in a large antique blue and  
white china tureen in a silence that could be cut with a knife.
Guests were no doubt few and far between. The diner was  
excellent  and  when  we  asked  for  butter  a  huge  slab  was  
presented. After dinner we retired to our tent and the lights  
went  out.  The  night  was  warm  and  soon,  to  our  dismay,  
movements were heard outside of the tent, whether it was an  
animal or not we will never know, and we feared we would be  
61John Francis Kinsella
killed for the little we had. It was about that time the British  
and French press sensationally reported the trial of a French  
peasant  Gaston  Domenici  for  the  brutal  murder  of  Jack  
Drummond, a British scientist, with his wife and ten year old  
daughter in that region of France about four years earlier.
When day broke all was normal and after breakfast and with  
a certain feeling of relief we headed for Marseille. An hour  
later  we  were  on  the  pavement  before  a  grimy  motorcycle  
repair shop on a steep hill in a rundown neighbourhood of the  
city. The clutch had seized-up and Lou was in a discussion with  
a pessimistic mechanic who had never seen a Norton. 
Part of clutch mechanism plates had become welded together  
and needed replacing. Spare parts were unavailable, but Lou  
finally persuaded the mechanic he could repair the clutch if he  
had use of the tools. A couple of hours we were cautiously on  
our way again at the cost of a few francs. However, doubts as  
the to reliability of the repair were there and we abandoned the  
idea of going as far as the Italian Riviera. Checking our map  
we headed in the direction of Cassis and Bandol to the east of  
Marseilles. 
It  was  early  August  and  most  of  the  camping  sites  were  
booked out. Finally, between Saint-Cyr-sur-Mer and Bandol,  
tucked  away  in  one  of  the  many  Calanques,  we  found  a  
camping  site  perched  on  the  edge  of  the  limestone  cliffs  
overlooking  the  sea.  It  was  a  paradise.  An  extraordinary  
contrast with the grubby polluted Marseilles suburbs and the  
route nationale we had left behind us. The clean air, the dark  
green foliage of the maritime pines contrasting against the stark  
62A Traveller’s Tales
blue  of the  Mediterranean and the  off-white  colours of the  
rocks.
We were lucky as our tent was small, very small, and we  
were allocated a spot beyond the stone wall that delimited the  
official campsite near the edge of the steep rocky path that led  
down to the sea. As we set up our tent the temperature was not  
far off thirty degrees, there was not a cloud in the sky, and the  
campers were sunning themselves on the rocks of the small  
cove  or  swimming  in  the  translucent  waters  of  the  
Mediterranean below us.
Bandol
Camping in France was in its heydays. Tents as large as small  
houses, equipped with refrigerators, radios, TVs, beds, tables,  
chairs  and  even  kitchen  sinks.  Compared  to  camping  in  
England it was another world. As the late afternoon approached  
the campers prepared for the evening, the women fussed about  
63
John Francis Kinsella
the dinner, whilst the men gathered, a glass of Ricard in the  
hand, for a game of boules. The teenagers like us listened to  
Sacha Distel, Annie Cordy or Paul Anka singing their latest  
tube on the radio.
We  with  our  very  minimalist  tent  pitched  outside  the  
perimeter  wall  were  the  poor  relatives  and  with  no  home  
comforts, set out to find an affordable place to eat along the  
Route de la Calanque that led to Bandol.
Not able to afford eating out everyday, even in the simplest of  
the cafes and restaurants dotted amongst the pines along the  
coast road, we stocked up on tinned food and beer, then bought  
a couple of fresh baguettes at the local bakers. Our first lunch  
consisted of sardines on fresh crusty bread sitting on the wall  
overlooking the calanque under the shade of the pines watching  
the  swimmers  diving  from  the  rocks  below  us  into  the  
sparkling clear waters. 
The long journey was behind us, more than seven hundred  
miles, from Calais to Paris and then down the mythical though  
notorious N7 to Marseille, through lazy villages, past the never  
ending lines of plane trees, the cause of innumerable accidents  
and fatalities. The annual death toll on French roads in 1958,  
was a terrible sixteen thousand. Luckily for us we had avoided  
the annual migration at the beginning of the August when Paris  
was deserted by its population for their mandatory one month  
vacation in the sun.
I got over my disappointment of not returning to Italy and  
settled  down  to  a  daily  routine  of  exploring  the  calanques  
64A Traveller’s Tales
where I discovered an unimagined underwater world filled with  
fish and plants. It was only a couple of years since Cousteau’s  
film  ‘The  Silent  World’,  had  arrived  on  cinema  screens,  
showing  the  world  for  the  first  time  this  new  and  strange  
universe. Weighted down with a heavy rock in dived down to  
the depths, swimming through the forest of seaweeds waving in  
the beams of sunlight, spotting an octopus here, a shoal of fish  
there,  and  many  other  curious  Mediterranean  undersea  
denizens.
Soon  I  realized  that  France  was  very  different  to  Italy,  
camping  on  the  rocking  plateau  surrounded  by  the  white  
limestone cliffs and pine woods was a total contrast to the lines  
of deckchairs, beach huts, and the tourists of Rimini. There  
were no crowds, and far from the N7 little traffic passed. 
Lou  speaking  French  was  soon  talking  to  our  neighbours  
leaving me, to all intents dumb, to my own means. I explored  
the area surrounding the campsite, the cafés where I discovered  
how to order a beer and ask for a match.
We hit the road home about ten days later and after about ten  
kilometres noticed we had lost the kick-start pedal. We turned  
back, searching the road, but to no avail, and for the rest of the  
journey home we had to run and bump start the Norton. 
We made a quick stop in Paris to gaze at the Eiffel Tower.  
Lou had had enough with the technical incidents and wanted to  
be back home before some really serious happened. It was the  
August  bank  holiday  weekend  when  we  arrived  and  Lou  
65John Francis Kinsella
dropped me off at Orpington Station with my few belongings  
where I took the next train to Victoria.
That evening I headed down to the Cathedral Youth Club  
where I caught up with my friends fresh from my almost two  
thousand mile adventure in France. More important to me was  
to find my new girlfriend, Ann. 
My second incursion into Europe confirmed there was much  
waiting to be discovered beyond my home shores, though I had  
to wait three or four years during which time I took Ann to  
Ireland to discover the Emerald Isle.
66A Traveller’s Tales
9
hings had changed, in 1960 I was twenty and Ann was my  
steady, leaving me less time to see Jim and the rest of the  
gang.  As  that  year  got  under  way  our  thoughts  turned  to  
holidays.  Pamela,  Ann’s  elder  sister,  proposed  Devon  and  
Cornwall. It sounded alright, it wasn’t France, but it was in the  
south and Bob Wright painted a glowing picture of palm trees  
and sunny beaches lapped by the Gulf Stream. T
It was a disappointment, just another English seaside town.  
We had booked a decent rather grand though old fashioned  
hotel overlooking Torbay. Ann and Pam travelled by train and I  
by road on my shiny red and white Lambretta scooter. The start  
was not auspicious, somewhere near Exeter I was drench in a  
heavy summer downpour that flooded the roads with the water  
up to the scooter’s running board.
One of the less memorable outings was a conger eel fishing  
trip, a disaster as the boat heaved in the choppy sea and I  
heaved up my strawberry blancmange to the annoyance of the  
other trippers. The pink waves once again confirmed I was no  
sailor.
My  wages  were  still  miserly  though  Sands,  the  firm’s  
director,  assured  me  I  was  investing  in  the  future  and  that  
elsewhere insecurity reigned. I of course did not believe him,  
but  I  calculated  I  needed  to  complete  the  six  or  seven  of  
67John Francis Kinsella
training offered by the firm with my classes at the Poly to  
complete an engineering qualification before I could launch  
myself onto the job market. In the meantime I provided cheap  
labour for the engineering firm, on the more positive side I had  
reached the  age  of twenty one  and qualified for firm’s the  
annual bonus scheme and a bank account.
About that time the firm moved offices to Berkley Square and  
Ann encouraged me to save as our plans to get married slowly  
took form. As a consequence our 1961 holiday ambitions were  
limited and we decided to visit my family in Ireland.
 Berkley House on Berkley Square in London
Travelling by road was much too far for my scooter, but I  
figured out I could send it by train as we would need it to move  
around once we were in Ireland. British Railways took care of  
that and I delivered the scooter to Paddington goods station a  
68
A Traveller’s Tales
few days before we were due to leave. We followed on taking  
the train to Fishguard in South Wales, where we boarded the  
night  ferry  to  Rosslare  Harbour  on  the  southeast  coast  of  
Ireland.
We reserved couchettes and slept throughout the crossing,  
arriving in Ireland at around six the next morning. There then  
took  the  train  to  Enniscorthy,  where  my  Aunt  Peggy  was  
waiting for us at the station.
Ireland in 1961, had barely changed since my parents had left  
over two decades earlier and any ambitious young Irish man or  
woman still left to seek a job in London. My father had been  
the first to quit Ireland, though for more pressing reasons than  
simply finding a job. He was later followed by my uncles and  
aunts, who settled in London to raise their families, there was  
little future in Ireland in those days.
Ann stayed with at my aunts who made over her daughters’  
room for the two weeks. I stayed with my grandparents a ten  
minute  walk  away.  Ireland  was  not  yet  ready  for  young  
unmarried couples to share the same bed.
Summer in Ireland was as always a risky affair, but we were  
lucky, we were not rained out though we did not have exactly  
Riviera like weather either.
In  1964,  now  married,  since  the  previous  September,  we  
repeated the experience, but in better style. I had left the office  
on Cavendish Square and was working for another engineering  
firm in South Kensington where I was paid a very much better  
wage, a good secure job in spite of the grim picture Sands had  
69John Francis Kinsella
painted. We had moved to Hornchurch, Essex, where we had  
bought a newly built ground-floor maisonette, Ann worked as a  
secretary at the local police station a two minute walk away  
and I commuted to Kensington.
The office was a couple of minutes walk from the National  
History  Museum  and  the  Science  Museum —my  childhood  
haunts , situated at Kendrick Place. The firm, Ellis Kensington,  
was  run  by  Charl es Ellis,  know  as  Charley,  a  nasty  little  
bastard, ‘get your hands off that wall boy,’ he once said to me  
as I rushed down the stairs in my usual hurry. It was a few  
yards from the studio of Francis Bacon, on Reece Mews, a  
former stable.
Francis Bacon in his Reece Mews studio
70
A Traveller’s Tales
Mark Twain said,  Clothes maketh the  man. Naked people  
have little or no influence on society . It was something I must  
have felt instinctively and with a good wage I could invest in  
my appearance, that of a young man going places, which with  
my glasses conferred on me a studious though modern style. 
My dress style 1961...without the Aston Martin 
I had graduated from Cecil Gees Ivy League style to Austin  
Reeds, where my suits were now modelled in the style worn by  
Sean Connery, who burst onto the scene in the role of James  
Bond. I owned a payment card at Austin Reeds that encouraged  
me to buy all my accessories there, including shirts and ties.  
My shoes I bought at Churches.
The result was I looked a serious young man, not only was I  
in conformity with accepted dress codes, I was also soberly  
modern  to  my  bosses,  which  went  a  long  way  when  they  
needed a well-dressed, suitably qualified, outward going young  
man to promote their business ambitions.
71
John Francis Kinsella
On top of the Iraq Petroleum Company building on Cavendish  
Square 1963
We flew to Dublin where we rented a new Austin Mini and  
drove down to Enniscorthy where we arrived in grand style.  
The Mini allowed us to spread our wings visiting a good part of  
72
A Traveller’s Tales
Southwest  Ireland  and  friends  of  the  family’s  in  County  
Wexford with my aunt and cousins.
I  was  like  the  proverbial  American  when  I  arrived  in  
Enniscorthy in the brand new Mini that I parked on Pierce  
Road in front of my grandparents for them and the neighbours  
to admire. There was still a considerable difference in living  
standards  between  England  and  Ireland,  especially  between  
provincial Ireland and London. We were young, well dressed  
and well cared for compared to our country cousins as they  
really were in those days.
Ireland’s  economy  still  depended  to  a  great  extent  on  
agriculture and one of its principal sources of revenue was  
tourism. A few years earlier, the cover of the July 1956 issue of  
Dublin  Opinion,  a  cartoon  showed  the  despondency  that  
reigned  in  the  country  then,  it  bore  the  caption,  ‘ Shortly  
Available: Underdeveloped Country: Unrivalled Opportunities:  
Magnificent  Views,  Political  and  Otherwise:  Owners  Going  
Abroad ’. 
We did not know it at the time, but Ireland was at a watershed  
and what we saw was the end of an era that had followed  
decades of stagnation. Emigration was slowly coming to an  
end, though the average farmers’ family income was just £500  
a year and industrial workers between £350 and £450 pounds a  
year. 
Ann and I, a young couple just starting out, earned four times  
that, without the responsibility of bringing up children.
73John Francis Kinsella
My Aunt Peggy looked up to her farmer friends, who in the  
Southwest of Ireland were better off than in the rest of the  
country. For her they not only earned a good living in terms of  
money, but they also owned cars and disposed of an abundance  
of good fresh food. She made it a rule to regularly visit those  
friends and never returned without a basket of fresh eggs or  
vegetables, so when we arrived with our rental car we made the  
tour of all the local farms when we drank tea, ate freshly baked  
scones, and visited the farm.
We  never  ventured  very  far.  The  roads  were  narrow  and  
winding and apart from Dublin the time needed to visit the  
other main cities was too long. When the weather was good we  
headed for the nearby beaches of the south coast with Peggy  
and the cousins 
My Uncle Jim, not only did he work in Enniscorthy’s farmers  
cooperative, where he cultivated his relations with the local  
farmers offering his knowledge on the best seed, fertilizer and  
equipment, he was also a part-time fireman, waking us up in  
the  night  when  he  was  called  out  for  burning  hayricks  on  
nearby farms.
74A Traveller’s Tales
75
John Francis Kinsella
10
 soon quit Kensington for an even better paid job at Smeaton  
& Sons on Chancery Lane where a few months later the  
London representative of a Belgium equipment supplier offered  
me the opportunity to join a delegation for a three day congress  
of  engineers  and  manufacturers  to  be  held  in  the  National  
Theatre in the Martini Centre in Brussels. I of course accepted  
though my bosses were somewhat circumspect.I
September 8, 1964, we left London, Heathrow, on a specially  
chartered BEA de Havilland Comet 4B. Air travel was easy  
going in those days and on arrival in Brussels the group, about  
forty of us, posed at the foot of the jet’s stairway with a banner  
announcing ‘ van den bosch Europair Special ’. Van den Bosch,  
the  Belgian  manufacturers,  was  our  host  for  the  Second  
Europair Congress. No expenses were spared, the best hotels,  
cocktail  parties,  lunches,  a  gala  dinner  at  the  magnificent  
Chateau  du  Karreveld  at  Molenbeek-Saint-Jean,  a  short  
distance from the centre of Brussels, a visit to the Atomium and  
an outing to Antwerp for a boat trip. 
I palled-up with the editor of a trade magazine, he was a little  
older than I. True to his promise I was on the front cover of the  
magazine a month later, much to the chagrin of Smeatons’  
directors who had written the whole thing off as a waste of  
time. 
76A Traveller’s Tales
It was true, it was a waste of time for Smeatons, a waste of  
drinking  time.  The  MD,  Malcolm  Smeaton  and  his  two  
directors, spent most of the day in The Blue Anchor pub on  
Chancery Lane getting stoned.
At the foot of the Comet
The reception was held in the impressive twenty ninth floor  
of  Martini  Centre,  or  to  be  more  precise  Brussels  Centre  
International Rogier, called the Martini Tower because of the  
giant neon sign on its roof, where the exhibition was held. The  
tower which dominated the Brussels was completed in 1958,  
for the World Exposition. As in Italy, five years earlier, I was  
again surprised to discover that London was not unique in its  
modern architectural achievements.
77
John Francis Kinsella
In Brussels I was amazed to discover how much money a  
firm could spend on the promotion of its products. We were  
chaperoned in coaches from one event to another, the crowning  
event was a diner in the chateau hosted by the city’s mayor.  
However we wanted to see the rest of the city and to escape  
from our guardians after the evening’s celebrations we returned  
to the hotel feigning fatigue, then once free we ducked out to  
discover Brussels’ night life.
With a glass in my hand, what else
I found myself with an architect from one of London’s most  
well known firms whose only goal was to visit the red light  
district, but not alone. My experience in the matter was less  
than limited and I did not feel like getting worked over by the  
local touts if they were anything like those I had seen in Soho.
78
A Traveller’s Tales
* * *
On my return to London, Derek Hawes, with whom  I had  
worked in Kensington, contacted me, he had set up a small  
engineering  company  together  with  a  certain  Ron  Hutton  
owner of a sheetmetal manufacturing company. Derek wanted  
me to subcontract work to them and to curry favour proposed a  
visit to Paris where a large trade exhibition was being held in  
December 1965. We flew to Le Bourget and took a taxi to the  
hotel on rue Boetie, just off the Champs Elysee. It was my first  
real visit to Paris and over the following three days we spent  
visiting the sights, then rented a car to visit the Châteaux de  
Pierrefonds about seventy kilometres away to the north-east. It  
was a great four day trip, though when I got back to the office I  
had to invent a story about the exhibition as we never even  
found out where it was being held not to mind visiting it.
I left Smeatons for a couple of reasons, the first was Derek  
offered me a much better paid job in his company in north  
London, and secondly, Smeatons seemed to be boozing their  
way to disaster.
The  previous Christmas Eve, I crossed Malcolm  Smeaton  
fumbling  with  the  key  to  the  board.  He  explained  he  was  
having difficulty opening the door. Brightly I took the key and  
turned it smartly in the lock, the door swung open and the MD  
was projected headlong into the room. He was blind drunk and  
it was not yet lunch time.
After lunch Smeaton when had left, the marketing director,  
Tom Masters, was spotted on top of the MD’s secretary on the  
79John Francis Kinsella
floor in the boardroom. He had carefully laid out a few large  
sheets of kraft paper on the floor, whether it was to avoid  
dirtying his suit or protect the secretary’s backside still remains  
a mystery.
Christmas at Smeaton & Sons on Chancery Lane
That October, Harold Wilson won the general election by four  
seats and I, naively voicing my pleasure, was loudly insulted  
by an ageing solicitor from the office neighbouring mine in an  
annexe on Chancery Lane. Labour or Conservative made little  
difference  to  Smeaton’s  directors,  who  more  by  luck  than  
judgement survived, tottering on the brink of bankruptcy as  
they soldiered on from one month to another on the path to  
inevitable doom.
80
A Traveller’s Tales
Wisely I took Derek up on his offer and handed in my notice.  
My leaving party left me memorably drunk stretched out on a  
bench in Gray’s Inn Court under a mist of fine rain.
81John Francis Kinsella
11
erek’s  partner,  Ron  Hutton,  had  several  firms  
manufacturing  air-conditioning  equipment,  he  was  
reputed to be a less than discriminating businessman, but I  
brushed that consideration aside naively putting my trust in  
Derek.  However,  it  did  not  take  long  to  discover  Hutton’s  
reputation  was  no  legend,  there  was  little  doubt  he  lived  
beyond  his  means.  He  had  a  certain  charm  that  convinced  
people to put business his way, underbidding for contracts or  
by  generous  backhanders  to  his  customers’  purchasing  
managers. I stayed with him for just a few months and at the  
first opportunity I was off.D
Those few months were not however entirely negative, since  
I managed to spend three weeks in Las Palmas on the Canary  
Islands, where I was sent to sort out problems relating to a  
contract there. The determining criteria for me being chosen  
was my possession of a valid passport and my ability to speak a  
smattering of French, what help that could be in Spain was not  
debated.
Ron Hutton’s firm had a contract to equipe a new British  
United Airways hotel with an air conditioning system and our  
man  on  the  site  was  having  difficulties  in  getting  various  
materials released from the Spanish customs in the port of Las  
Palmas. My role was to resolve the problem.
82A Traveller’s Tales
Las Palmas was an exotic new destination for well-heeled  
holiday makers arriving by air. The Canary Islands was also a  
destination for cruise liners such as the Queen Mary that visited  
the islands for the first time in 1963.
January 3, 1966, I boarded the BUA VC-10 that flew twice a  
week from London Gatwick to South America, stopping in  
Lisbon, and Las Palmas where the aircraft was refuelled for the  
South Atlantic leg. It was my first ‘long distance’ flight. The  
plane was far from being full and I had a whole row of seats to  
myself. When diner was served I declined thinking it would be  
expensive.  The  sympathetic  hostess  seeing  my  dilemma  
whispered everything was included, there was nothing to pay,  
on top of that drinks were free. I relaxed and enjoyed the meal  
with a couple or more glasses of red wine.
The Reine Isabel H otel
83
John Francis Kinsella
It was late in the evening when I disembarked at Las Palmas  
ahead of schedule, the pilot had decided to skip the Lisbon stop  
as  there  were  no  passengers  disembarking  or  embarking,  
something difficult to imagine fifty years later.
A BUA VC10
I was met at Las Palmas Airport by John Buick and we took a  
taxi  to  the  hotel  which  had  already  opened  and  was  fully  
booked. John was supervisor for our contract at the hotel. He  
was two or three  years older than myself and delighted to  
discover I was not some old fogey. I checked into my luxurious  
room, the latest in hotel design, and we headed for the bar  
where he filled me in on his problems with the customs.
The hotel was the latest and the best in Las Palmas, ideally  
positioned overlooking Playa de las Canteras and the bay. It  
was a joint-venture to cater for travellers who arrived with  
BUA, some were holidaymakers others would be joining their  
flight to South America or taking connecting flights to West  
Africa.
84
A Traveller’s Tales
The equipment was held up in the port for a non-elucidated  
problem with customs clearance. The next morning we walked  
to the port fifteen minutes from the hotel. The temperature was  
in the low twenties and the sky without a cloud as we made our  
way along the beachfront under the palm trees before turning  
towards the port district. It was an indescribable improvement  
compared to the  winter gloom  of North London where  the  
firm’s office was situated. 
The postcard - Las Canteras beach 1965
The  Scandinavians  discovered  the  Canaries  as  a  tourist  
destination in the late fifties when the first charter flight arrived  
with fifty four passengers from Sweden. In January 1966, it  
was the height of the tourist season and the temperature was  
tropical compared to London. The island had not yet become a  
mass tourist destination, far from it. There were few crowds in  
Las Palmas where the population was less than half of that  
today.
85
John Francis Kinsella
In the port area Buick showed me the crates containing the  
material  still  to be  installed in the  hotel. We  presented the  
papers to the customs officials who waved their heads with a  
resolute no. We did not understand a word of Spanish and they  
could speak almost  no English. It  was a  stalemate  and we  
returned to the hotel for lunch.
Inspecting the crates
After lunch with nothing better to do we decided to take the  
sun by the hotel’s rooftop pool. As we crossed the lounge bar,  
me in my swimming costume and a towel over my shoulder,  
Buick stopped to introduce me to the hotel manager as the  
person who had come to resolve the problems linked to the  
ventilation plant in the hotel’s emergency generator room.
86
A Traveller’s Tales
Each morning after checking the progress in the work in the  
hotel  basement  we  walked  to  the  port  where  a  mutually  
incomprehensible dialogue took place with a lot of shrugging  
of shoulders. Each afternoon we went to the beach and towards  
six o’clock we headed for a cozy bar in one of the narrow side  
streets run by an English couple where we drank beer.
Downtown Las Palmas 1965
Like that the waiting was spent by the hotel pool and in  
different bars frequented by BUA crews where we could drink  
for almost nothing in the company of the  airline’s attractive  
stewardesses on their three day stopover from Rio di Janeiro.  
Long distance flights at that time hopped from point to point  
for  refuelling  reasons  and  for  joining  and  disembarking  
passengers.
87
John Francis Kinsella
The aircrews were changed in Las Palmas and lodged in the  
Astoria, a neighbouring hotel. Its bar was the meeting point for  
the stewardesses where Buick had discovered that by merely  
pronouncing the word buah  - for BUA - all drinks went on the  
airline’s tab. Needless to say we spent every evening drinking  
at the bar and chatting up the BUA girls.
The port area of Las Palmas 1966
The Canary Islands was an eye opener for a young man on a  
business  trip in 1964. I passed three  exciting,  but frustrating  
88
A Traveller’s Tales
weeks , in the luxury Reine Isabel H otel. The Spanish customs  
had not the paperwork required and would not release the parts.  
It  was  ainfructuous  negotiation  as  we  had  no  common  
language, but we finally circumvented the problem by finding  
local suppliers for the missing parts and the hotel was officially  
inaugurated in January 1966.
Returning to London in midwinter was a dismal prospect and  
I regretted having to leaving Buick alone to enjoy the pleasures  
of the Canary Islands, but I had other, albeit less exciting, work  
on hand.
Some weeks later I received a phone call from Bob Wright,  
my former section leader at Carrier-Ross. He had landed a job  
as  departmental  manager  in  a  large  engineering  firm  at  
Highgate in North London. He invited me to a pub lunch and  
offered  me  a  job.  I  had  only  been  with  Ron  Hutton  three  
months,  but  I  couldn’t  see  any  future  in  his  company,  
disparagingly described by my ex-colleagues as ‘tin bashers’.  
Bob’s offer was not to be refused, Sturtevant Engineering was a  
first  class  company,  their  London  HQ  situated  in  a  large  
modern office building, and more importantly he offered me a  
fifty percent pay increase.
89John Francis Kinsella
12
t was an excellent decision to move to Highgate where a  
world  of  opportunities  opened  up  for  me.  Sturtevant  
Engineering exported a good part of its products and services,  
however, in the mid-sixties markets were changing, the postwar  
boom  was  petering  out  and  the  company  was  turning  its  
attention from its traditional home and Commonwealth markets  
to Europe.I
Sturtevant House at Highgate in London
The  remainder  of  1966,  was  not  very  eventful  as  far  as  
foreign travel was concerned, a couple of weeks in Belgium for  
90
A Traveller’s Tales
the summer holidays at Blankenberge. Ann and I stayed in a  
small easy going hotel and explored the nearby towns of Bruge  
and  Ghent.  It  did  not  resemble  Rimini  or  Las  Palmas  and  
neither did the weather, and we decided our next holiday would  
be in Spain.
One morning in spring 1967, Bob Wright walked into the  
office  fresh  from  a  management  meeting  and  asked,  ‘Does  
anyone speak French?’ 
‘I do,’ I replied without hesitation. 
I did not realize it at the time, but with those words I set in  
motion  the  events  that  were  to  transform  my  dream  of  
travelling the world, back in 1958, into reality. That day was  
the  starting point  of a  long career of swanning around the  
world aux frais de la princesse .
Bob invited me into his office and explained Sturtevant had  
signed  a  cooperation  agreement  with  a  French  company  
situated  in  the  small  town  of  Louviers,  in  Normandy,  and  
needed a person to liaise with them. I got the job, though my  
French was less than rudimentary.
We  visited  Louviers  together,  where  we  were  wined  and  
dined, as only the French know how, at the invitation of Jean  
Husson, the owner of the French company. He was a charming  
man, a typical French patron, his hands and only his hands on  
the wheel, surrounded by his loyal and obedient adjutants led  
by Réné Coudrey. Coudrey was the caricature of a Frenchman  
at that time, a double of Pierre Mendeès France, he was short,  
91John Francis Kinsella
hook-nosed, his hair swept back and parted in the middle, and a  
pungent Gauloises cigarette hanging from his lips.
Sera-Husson S.A. was represented throughout France by a  
VRP,  an  independent  commercial  agent,  remunerated  on  a  
commission  basis,  a  French  business  tradition.  Monsieur  
Fourneron was a large friendly though very pompous man who  
made a good living from his commissions, living in a large  
house  in  the  town  of  Evreux  and  driving  the  latest  model  
Citroen DS.
My excuses to Mendeès France
A couple on months later I was back in France, stopping of at  
Husson’s  Paris  office  situated  on  boulevard  Malesherbes.  I  
overnighted in a rather seedy hotel facing Gare Saint Lazare,  
which was a short walk from the office. Coudray spoke French  
most of the time, his English was poor, but my French was  
even poorer. It was a meeting of cross purposes, but luckily the  
technical  plans spoke  for themselves, though there  was the  
92
A Traveller’s Tales
complication of conversion from the British Imperial system to  
the metric system, which was not in use in the UK at that time.
At the end of a very long long day, I left the office my head  
reeling from a late lunch, the effects of wine, beer and the  
smell of French tobacco, and the constant effort to understand  
French spoken at one hundred miles an hour. The following  
day I took the train to Evreux to meet Monsieur Fourneron and  
had an epic time trying to pronounce Evreux at the ticketing  
office.
Fourneron’s English was much better than Coudray’s and the  
hotel,  Le  Grand  Cerf,  much  better  than  that  at  Gare  Saint  
Lazare. However the tobacco and lunches were just as trying  
and on top of that Fourneron was a gourmet. 
It was agreed that as soon as the holidays were over I would  
start  meeting  potential  French  customers  with  Monsieur  
Fourneron to introduce Stutevant’s processes and machines that  
could be manufactured in France by our new partener.
But first came my annual holidays which as planned were to  
be in Spain. We decided to drive and put our new red Hillman  
Imp on the ferry to Calais at the beginning of the last week in  
June. 
Our idea was San Sebastian in the northeast of Spain for the  
simple  reason  it  seemed  to  be  nearer.  However,  in  our  
ignorance we confounded the Atlantic temperate climate with  
the Mediterranean sun of the Costa Brava and  as we headed  
down the French Atlantic coast the weather was wet and cold  
and  Ann  cried  with  disappointment . There  was  only  one  
93John Francis Kinsella
solution  and  not  being  bound  by  hotel  reservations,  before  
reaching  Bordeaux  I  cut  east towards  the  Pyr enees  in  the 
direction of the  Med. It was not the easiest of roads and we  
finally crossed into Spain at La Junquera at midday on June 30,  
and arrived in the Old Town of Sitges a few hours later.
It was  early  evening, warm and the narrow streets with their  
white houses  throng ed with suntanned tourists  setting  out to  
eat, drink or look for souvenirs, shop for leather goods and  
summer clothes , in the colourful palm studded old town.
Sitges on the Costa Brava in 1965
It reminded me of Italy, more picturesque, and was exactly  
what we were looking for  and Ann’s disappointment and tears  
were soon far behind us.
It was the dawn of modern tourism when continental holidays  
started to become affordable for ordinary people. Marbella and  
94
A Traveller’s Tales
Benidorm had not yet been born, they were small towns that  
were  no  more  than  a  twinkle  in  the  eye  of  the  future  
developers.
My sister Liz was one of the early buyers at Fuengirola,  
twenty kilometres to the east of Marbella. She bought a fully  
equipped, five roomed apartment, on Las Mijas beach. 
Ten  years  later,  returning  from  a  road  trip  to  Morocco,  
Françoise and myself stayed there for a week. Liz’s neighbour,  
George, gave us the key and invited us for a drink. He showed  
us photos of the beach that dated from about 1965, when there  
was nothing but sand and a few fishermens’ huts  where George  
and his wife  were  sunbathing against the backdrop of the Sierra  
de las Nieves,  and just  a passing beach vendor peddling his  
wares, no hotels, no appartments, no restaurants, just a long sun  
drenched beach.
The Hillman Imp
The Costa Brava was becoming fashionable in 1965. Franco  
still ruled, but it was the beginning of the economic miracle  
95
John Francis Kinsella
that was to transform Spain one of Europe’s leading tourist  
destinations , bringing prosperity and  modernisation after civil  
war and poverty.
In the meantime Ann and I headed for Rosas where the sun  
and beaches of the Costa Brava greeted us. We were enchanted  
and  spent  the  next  ten  days  exploring  the  coast  as  far  as  
Palamos.  Having  the  car  we  loaded  up  with  souvenirs,  
fashionable ceramics and stone carvings.
Triumphal Arch of Bera in Tarragona Spain circa 13BC
It was also my first encounter with the vestiges of the Roman  
Empire  beyond  Bath  in  Somerset,  which  I  found  a  little  
disappointing after reading Robert Graves’ book ‘I Cladius’ and  
the Roman and Greek classics. In Spain I stood awed before  
the Triumphal Arch of Bera on the coast road between Sitges  
and Tarragona.
On the  return trip  I put Ann on  a flight to London at Le  
Bourget  near  Paris  and  continued  to  Evreux  in  Normandy  
96
A Traveller’s Tales
where I joined up with Monsieur Fourneron for a series of  
visits to French papermills in his Citroën DS that lasted ten  
days. To my surprise the mills I visited were more run down  
than those I had grown used to in the UK where much money  
had been invested to increase production and efficiency.
The  trip  was  marked  by  ‘Etapes  VRP’,  that  is  hotels  for  
businessmen  and  company  representatives.  Apart  from  our 
business visits,  each day was marked by two extravagantly  
large  meals , lunch  and  dinner.  Appointments  with  French  
companies, to who m we presented our engineering products,  
took place at between nine and eleven in the morning, we left  
before lunch, always from midday until two in the provinces,  
and the afternoon appoints from two thirty until four thirty.
Citroën DS 1965
Lunch time was thus spent in a VRP restaurant w here local  
businessmen and travellers met. Four course meals with drinks,  
wine, coffee and invariably a cognac. Evenings were passed in  
a similar but more leisurely fashion, after all in most of those  
97
John Francis Kinsella
small towns there was nothing else to do. It was all part of a  
long standing tradition which today has all but disappeared.
Today when I hear foreigners speaking of the thirty five hour  
week in France, I laugh. The vast majority of people work  at 
least forty hours a week and very much more, plus commuting.  
Business lunches of the old style are reserved for privileged  
visitors.
After  a  pleasurable  week  of  driving  around  France  in  
Monsieur Fourneron’s DS we returned to Evereux where we  
reported to Jean Husson, the local industrialist who Fourneron  
represented and with whom Sturtevant had made an agreement.  
Husson  was a local notable whose company manufactured a  
broad range of machinery for agriculture, industry and military  
products such a gas tanks for French Army tanks.
Husson was a charming man with whom I was to fall out with  
some  ten  years  later.  He  had  three  very  delightful  though  
somewhat snobbishly French daughters and they lived in a very  
large villa on the road between Louviers and Evreux.
The  day  of  my  departure  I  was  invited  to  lunch  with  
Monsieur Fourneron and family. He had one daughter of about  
twenty who was charming , but rather bourgoise. Foureron was  
a stiff traditional French engineer and jealous of his standing as  
a local notable. To me I suppose, he was rather a strict though  
tolerant father figure. In his large nineteenth century house, he  
served me whisky, wine and cognac, it was important I put in a  
favourable  report  on  his  services  and  enthusiasm  for  Jean  
Husson’s firm. It was too much and I just about made it back to  
98A Traveller’s Tales
the Hotel du Grand Cerf where I spent the afternoon recovering  
after  vomiting  the  lot  in  the  bidet.  That  early  September  
evening,  feeling  somewhat  better  with  a  good  part  of  the  
alcohol flushed out, I headed for Calais and the Dover ferry  
home. 
I had spent a memorable month on the continent, between  
France and Spain for business and holidays. I had progresse d in 
French  and  made  a  few  steps  more  in  Spanish,  but  more  
importantly  was set on a trajectory that was to last fifty and  
more  years ,  travelling  around  the  world  for  business  and  
pleasure.
After a number of trips to France, the feed back must have  
been good and I was asked to provide backup to the firm’s  
agent in Holland who had already brought in some profitable  
business.
99John Francis Kinsella
13
ittle by little I was carving out a r ole for myself  and soon I  
was transferred to the Export Department under my older  
colleague  Les  Pazowski,  who  replaced  another  Polish  
compatriot who had retired. L
The  logic  was  exporting  started  with  a  foreigner  who  
understood Europe better than we Brits, which was true . This  
came  as  the  UK,  whose  traditional  markets,  previously  the  
Empire, now the Commonwealth, was buffeted by the ‘Wind of  
Change’  which  had  reached  gale  force  and  the  UK’s  
rapprochement with Europe took form as the latters economy  
boomed.
Les Pazowski was an engineer who inherited an  assistant , 
Harold,  a  mild  mannered  polyglot  Egyptian , who  saw  my  
arrival with a bad eye.  To him  I was young, inexperienced and  
wrote  grammatically incorrect  French.  That said the company  
needed an engineer, young and well presented, who projected a  
modern image and I fitted the job.
Besides  everybody  spoke  English  sufficiently  well  and  
though Harold’s grammar was good, he didn’t know one end of  
a screw from the other, he was more adapted to clerical work  
and shipping documents.
As my experience travelling on the continent grew, I was  
given  the  task  of  liaising  with  Sturtevant’s  agent  in  the  
Netherlands,  Herr  Hahn,  an  amiable,  though  somewhat  
100A Traveller’s Tales
bumbling character,  whose hometown was Rosendaal  situated  
in a flat uninteresting region to the south of Rotterdam. Hahn  
had big plans  and with him  I discovered the Netherlands, an  
experience that was to serve me well six or seven  years later. 
Amongst the agreeabl e things  he introduced me to was was  
the rijsttafel , a dish that I was destined to become much more  
familiar  with  much  later  during  the  years  I  travelled  in  
Indonesia , a former colony of the Netherlands, successor to the  
Vereenigde  Oostindische  Compagnie,  which  in  its  different  
forms was governed by Amsterdam for 350 years.
It  was  an  interesting  point  in  my  career  with  my  field  
broadening out into other engineering branches as Sturtevant’s  
export drive gathered momentum. Up until that point I had  
been  mostly  involved  in  the  paper  manufacturing  industry,  
mostly air systems, which by extension explained how during  
four  years  I’d  become  involved  in  air-conditioning  and  
mechanical services for high rise office buildings which were  
springing up all over London in those days. 
Sturtevants was into materials processing, everything from  
mining  and  quarrying  equipment  to  insecticide  formulation  
plants  and  electrostatic  precipitators  for  coal  fired  power  
stations. Mr Hahn up until that point had been specialised in  
the latter fields.
Thus,  without  really  being  aware  of  it,  I  became  process  
polyvalent and developed a broad know-how in export market  
development for engineered products.
101John Francis Kinsella
It was around that time Bob Wright made an agreement with  
a family owned Italian firm, Brunnschweiler S.A., situated in  
the small Italian town of Gorizia  which  lay on the border of  
what was then Yugoslavia, now Slovenia , in fact the border cut  
the town in two. On the Italian side was Gorizia and on the  
Yugoslav side Novo Gorizia, a vestige of the division of once  
great  Austro-Hungarian  Empire,  the  result  of  a  territorial  
dispute following the two world wars.  In 1947, the old town  
was left to Italy and Nova Gorica, as it was renamed, was built  
on the Yugoslav side. Today the two towns form part of a  
conurbation shared by Italia and Slovenia both members of the  
EU and the Eurozone.
Sturtevant  was  to  promote  Brunnschweiler’ s systems  in  
territories  defined  in  the  agreement,  namely  the  EFTA  
countries , that is  the UK, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, Finland,  
Portugal and Switzerland. The promotion of Brunnschweiller’s  
systems was added to my portfolio, not only for the previously  
mentioned  countries,  but  also  France  where  I  was  already  
active, which was not however an EFTA member,  but  rather  
part of the EEC.
I flew to Venice and was met at Mestre Airport by one of the  
Brunnschweiler  family  members  whose  English  was  not  
perfect like my Italian, but we got along fine. We drove  north  
in the direction of Malfalcone stopping to eat an epicurean  
meal at an excellent restaurant off the autostrada. After lunch  
my new friend drove fast explaining we had to get  Malfalcone  
fast, but for what reason I did not fully understand. 
102A Traveller’s Tales
On  arrival  he  raced  into  the  port  where  we  parked  and  
hurry ing off on foot he excitedly pointed ahead. I saw  nothing  
but a vast steel wall. Then, on looking more carefully I saw it  
had started  moving . It was  the flank of a giant oil tanker being  
launched  down its slipway into the sea . We arrived just  in time  
to see it slip past dragging mountains of smoking iron chains,  
designed to slow the huge vessel on its way down to the water.
Suddenly it was gone and there before us was a grandstand  
decorated with buntings, filled with well dressed dignitaries  
and company directors and their wives, staring into the now  
vacant space.
In Gorizia I  visited Brunnschweiler’s factory and one of their  
installations at a nearby Italian papermill where I was given a  
tour and a demonstration of their system. 
Little by little I was carving out a r ole for myself  and over the  
next  twelve  months  I  criss-crossed  France  with  Fourneron,  
visiting customers, staying in excellent hotels, which would be  
described as  bonnes étapes , discovering French cuisine  and  
good wines. One of the most memorable visits was to Alsace  
when we crossed the V oges as the spring snow was melting  
with  a  panorama  that  included  the  Chateaux  de  Haute  
Konigsberg, and the regions famous vineyards before us. Little  
did I know that six years later I would be living within less  
than half an hour’s drive from that very spot.
103John Francis Kinsella
14
n  1967,  I  settled  in  to  Sturtevant’s  export  department,  
building my experience. It was I suppose justified by the  
fact that I was the only one available to combine technical  
knowledge and travel experience, together with the rudiments  
of a foreign language, in which I was making progress, and my  
bosses seemed to approve. I
Soon  I  was  travelling  to  Norway,  Sweden,  Finland  and  
Denmark, countries that were part of the now defunct EFTA  
block (The European Free Trade Association), which had been  
cobbled  together  by  the  UK  in  response  to  the  Common  
Market.
That autumn the firm’s managing director visited the USA to  
meet the Westinghouse Company with whom we had standing  
agreements  and  licences.  Their  man  who  looked  after  that  
business, Walt Burkhart, figured Sturtevant would be interested  
in a technology developed by a Pittsburg company, Heyl &  
Patterson,  specialized  in  the  coal  industry  and  a  visit  was  
arranged for Bob Wright.
When Bob returned from the USA, he like so many others  
before him recounted legendary stories of the New World and  
New York in particular. I marvelled at his luck, my own recent  
experiences now seeming second class. I wondered if I would  
ever get the chance to visit the USA.
104A Traveller’s Tales
Bob brought back the promise of a licence for a unique coal  
treatment  process  based  on  the  calculation,  wet  coal  cost  
money to transport. I knew next to nothing about coal, but I  
was already a specialist in drying processes. It was illogical to  
transport a ton of coal that contained twenty percent water and  
coal could be dried cheaply using readily available coal as a  
fuel at the pit head. 
 A Heyl & Patterson Fluid Bed coal dryer
The Pittsburg engineering firm had built a successful business  
in the coal mining industry and especially in constructing giant  
coal dryers in Appalachia, America’s mining country, fluid bed  
dryers as large as a small city block. It seemed logical that the  
UK,  then  one  of  the  world’s  largest  coal  producers,  could  
benefit from such processes.
As  I  explained,  Sturtevant  counted  a  number  of  Polish  
engineers amongst its specialists, men who had fought under  
105
John Francis Kinsella
British command after the fall of Europe and had settled in the  
UK  after  the  war  had  ended.  One  of  these  engineers,  Les  
Pazowski, newly appoined manager of the export department,  
decided to develop new business with the Comecom countries  
and more in particular with Poland. 
Poland was a major producer of coal and Les after visiting  
the Polish Ministry of Industry in Warsaw, with the approval of  
our John Smith our managing director, decided we make a  
presentation of the H&P coal dryer to mines in that country. 
In 1968, the Cold War was at its height, and Leonid Ilyich  
Brezhnev, was the First Secretary of the Communist Party of  
the Soviet Union, it was a time when Communism looked an  
irresistible force, spreading it shadow with wars fought in to  
support communist ambitions in Vietnam, Angola and Central  
America.
November 13, 1968, I arrived in Warsaw with Les, where I  
presented my passport stamped with a full page visa from the  
Polish Embassy in London. It was bitterly cold and the streets  
of the city were covered with snow confirming my vision of  
Eastern Europe formed partly by the film Doctor Zhivago and  
the starkly cold images of Kruschev and Brezhnev.  
On arrival at the Grand Hotel we presented our passports to  
the receptionist, a hard faced product of Communism. She took  
mine, inspected it, and announced British. She then took Les’  
passport,  British  like  mine,  inspected  it,  and  to  Les’ great  
dismay announced ‘Polish’ and disdainfully threw it on the  
counter. In those days of the Cold War the regimes of the  
106A Traveller’s Tales
Soviet Block held the power of life and death over all those  
who naively strayed into its fold, especially those who had  
chosen to remain in the West, as had Les.
That evening we dined in the hotel’s palatial restaurant that  
reminded me of an epoch I had known only through films. It  
was filled with Russians, East Germans, Czechs and of course  
Poles,  as  well  as  those  from  every  other  corner  of  the  
Communist  empire.  There  were  also  Western  businessmen,  
mainly Germans and Austrians. 
Les discretely pointed them them all out for my benefit and  
education. The ambience was that of another world. There was  
the noise of conversation, the coming and going of waiters, but  
in  spite  of  the  bustle  there  was  a  strange  feeling  of  being  
watched, a feeling that people were on their guard. 
Positively the pound sterling carried weight and from the vast  
menu nothing was beyond our pockets. Les ordered a lavish  
multi-course diner with wine and vodka and I settled back to  
savour the strange new surroundings.
At a nearby table two men were laughing loudly. They had  
finished their meal and were drinking vodka. Then for some  
reason they started arguing, angrily, their voices rising, each  
ready to quit the table, without however attracting the least  
attention from other diners. I was alarmed to see such a scene  
in a grand hotel. Before I knew it they were in tears, almost in  
each others arms, evidently regretting their harsh words, and  
refilling their glasses. Soon they were happy, friends again. It  
was a cycle that repeated itself for a couple of hours. I had  
107John Francis Kinsella
discovered Slavic temperament, sentimentality, and their liking  
for vodka.
After a visit to one of the ministries in Warsaw and in passing  
a tour of the city I was amazed by the strange Palace of Culture  
and Science, until 1957, the tallest building in Europe, a gift  
from the Soviet Union to the people of Poland at the end of  
Joseph Stalin’s reign.
The Grand Hotel in Krakow Old Town
We then flew south to Krakow, a beautiful historical city in  
the  heart  of  Poland’s  coal  mining  region.  There  from  my  
window in the magnificent Grand Krakow Hotel, situated in  
the heart of the Old Town, a short walk away from the market  
square, one of the largest medieval market squares in Europe, I  
saw people hurrying home in the heavy snow. Below me in the  
thick snow piled up in the gutter laid a man, ignored by the  
passers-by, stone drunk. Inside, the hotel was overheated, as  
were  all  buildings  to  ward  off  the  harsh  winter  climate,  
108
A Traveller’s Tales
something  I  was  to  discover  all  over  Eastern  Europe  and  
Scandinavia.
From an outward appearance the mines we visited were not  
unlike those I had seen in England, part of that bleak industrial  
landscapes. One morning as we stood at the pit head talking to  
a  representative  from  the  Ministry  of  Mines,  a  shift  was  
changing with crowds of miners poured out of the huge lifts.  
The ministry man suddenly asked me what I thought of Polish  
girls. He laughed at the puzzlement on my face, then pointed to  
the burly coal blackened miners, they were women.
At the end of the afternoon we left the ministry offices and  
Les  introduced  me  to  the  local  Konditories,  traditional  
upmarket  Polish  coffee  houses,  which  offered  coffee  and  a  
wide  variety  of  pastries,  served  in  a  warm  comfortably  
furnished  salon.  There  was  what  I  could  only  define  as  a  
Central European atmosphere, one that I was to later discover  
in Vienna, where women wore their felt hats at their tables, the  
kinds  of  hats  worn  in  pre-war  films.  The  pastries  were  
delicious, the windows of the overheated salon steamed up  
hiding the passers-by that shuffled past in the snow outside.  
The clientele was no doubt part of the privileged nomenklatura,  
far  removed  from  the  women  miners  we  had  seen  at  the  
pitheads.
A week later I said goodbye to Les at the railway station in  
Krakow. I was on my own when I boarded the express for  
Vienna, not speaking a word of Polish. I was to change in Brno  
for  Prague,  my  destination,  where  I  was  to  meet  the  
109John Francis Kinsella
representative of an Anglo-American firm to discuss a project  
in Czechoslovakia.
I  was  a  curiosity  in  the  train,  a  young  Westerner  and  an  
Englishman at that, very visible by my clothes. Conversation  
was difficult and I settled down to watch the country side go  
past. At the Polish frontier my passport was stamped and in the  
mid-afternoon I descended from the train in Brno.
There was a couple of hours wait for my train to Prague, and  
without without a penny in local currency in my pocket, I  
dropped my bags in the left luggage and set off to find a bank. I  
found nothing that resembled a bank and more than an hour  
later I was back in the station empty handed. My problems  
started when I tried to recover my bags. Polish zlotys were  
refused, as were English pounds and travellers cheques. My  
suitcase and briefcase stood on the counter, time was passing  
and after a long and fruitless discussion I made a grab for my  
bags as the train pulled into the station. 
The  reaction  was  instant,  the  hysterical  woman  attendant  
screamed and pulled down the shutter, an open grille, with a  
loud bang, attracting the attention of the waiting passengers.  
Luckily a bystander who had been watching the scene pulled  
out a couple of koruna, calmed the left luggage attendant and I  
scrambled for train in a profusion of thanks as my saviour  
alarmed at my offer of pounds, foreign currency, hurried me on  
my way. The fear of being accused of trafficking in foreign  
currency, severely punished in the Communist Bloc.
110A Traveller’s Tales
I  settled  down  in  a  full  compartment  where  a  couple  of  
passengers spoke a little English and talked to me of their  
wartime experiences and their admiration for England and the  
RAF.
Arriving in Prague I discovered the city shrouded under a  
blanket of thick yellow smog, there I was booked into the  
Alcron Hotel, in the city centre, a few paces from Wenceslas  
Square. The next day I set out to meet my contact who like  
many  other  foreign  representatives  at  that  time  had  elected  
residence in one of the large hotels not far from my own. On  
arrival  I  was  informed  by  the  reception  he  was  not  there  
without receiving any additional details.
In 1967, change was in the air. The Czech president, Antonín  
Novotný, was losing support and was challenged by Alexander  
Dubček,  who  invited  Soviet  premier  Leonid  Brezhnev  to  
Prague  that  December.  Brezhnev  accepted  Dubček  as  
replacement of Novotný. The follow March, Novotný resigned  
as President. This led to a cry for reform, known as the Prague  
Spring, which amongst other things would limit the power of  
the Secret Police.
I had little to do but wait, the standard practice in Eastern  
Europe. The pall of thick yellow smog that covered the city  
transformed the pavements into an ice skating rink as night fell,  
making visiting difficult with my city slickers as I set out to  
explore and look for a souvenir to take home to London..
The shops were better than provincial Krakow where I had  
watched people patiently queuing for Christmas gifts in a toy  
111John Francis Kinsella
shop  as  no-nonsense  assistants  presented  them  with  their  
products, one by one over a counter, in a take it or leave it  
fashion. 
 At the bottom of Wenceslas Square, more a broad avenue  
than  a  square,  on  a  street  leading  to  the  Vltava  River,  I  
discovered a shop selling crystal and bought an ashtray with a  
matching  cigarette  box  in  heavy  yellow  Bohemian  crystal  
presented in a velvet box. I had to sort through the whole stock  
to find a set that was not damaged in some way or the other and  
was forced to persuaded a not very happy sales assistant to take  
the ash tray from one presentation box and the cigarette box  
from another.
After ten days in behind the Iron Curtain, I was beginning to  
see the shoddier side of Communism’s manufactured goods  
and the blatant inefficiencies of its system. However, my pride  
and confidence in being British had been dented just a few  
days earlier when on Saturday, November 18, I went to the  
foreign exchange desk to change some travellers cheques and  
was  greeted  by  a  smirking  cashier  who  announced:  ‘Your  
country’s money has been devalued.’
It was like a slap in the face. Harold Wilson had told the  
British public, ‘It does not mean that the pound here in Britain,  
in your pocket, in your purse or bank, has been devalued.’ But  
there I was in Poland with my pounds amputated by a massive  
14.3%, it was a triumph for those we met, proof to them that  
Communism was winning the Cold War. 
112A Traveller’s Tales
Little news of everyday life in the West filtered through to the  
general public in Eastern Europe and when they saw people  
like  myself,  they  explained  our  comparative  affluence  by  
believing us to be part of a privileged elite.
After a week in the Czechoslovak capital and no sign of my  
contact I called it a day and headed home to London, where  
Les had already announced to our managing director that a  
glowing  future  lay  ahead  of  us  in  the  Polish  coal  mining  
industry.
There  was  one  obstacle  however,  the  absence  of  an  
installations that could be visited in the UK or Europe,  and the  
idea was mooted we set up a pilot plant in our R&D centre in  
Manchester to demonstrate the process.
At Sturtevant House London , I’m seated on the right
113
John Francis Kinsella
15
n the three weeks that had passed since my return from  
Eastern Europe calculations were made by our engineers for  
the investment needed, transatlantic telephone lines buzzed and  
yards  of  tape  poured  out  of  clattering  telex  machines  and  
before I knew it I was on a TWA Boeing 707 heading for New  
York and Pittsburgh to discuss the details with our American  
counterparts.I
As I settled down for the long transatlantic flight, I flipped  
through the English newspapers that announced the Rolling  
Stones guitarist Brian Jones had a nine month jail sentence  
overturned at the Court of Appeal in London. 
I  was  also  interested  by  the  political  news  that  was  
concentrated on the consequences of De Gaulle’s rebuttal of  
Britain’s application to join the EEC a couple of weeks earlier.  
My feelings were mixed, I wanted Britain in the EEC, but was  
for  visceral  reasons,  being  conditioned  by  the  system  and  
history, saw the French president as an obstructionist.
I arrived in New York early in the early evening December  
12, 1967, and was met at JFK International by Walt Burkhart.  
Under  the  wing  of  Walt,  a  refined,  warm  and  friendly  
individual,  we  took  one  of  the  famous  Yellow  Cabs  to  
downtown Manhattan and the renowned Biltmore Hotel that  
adjoined the  Grand Central  Terminal  railway station. I was  
114A Traveller’s Tales
checked in and told to give the bellhop a quarter for carrying  
my bags and showing me to my room overlooking the city.
The Biltmore New York demolished in 1981
Walt barely left me time to refresh myself. He was waiting in  
the lobby to take me to diner and describe my programme for  
the coming ten days. We dined in a French restaurant, a choice  
that seemed rather strange to me arriving from Europe, I cannot  
say I was disappointed, it was obviously expensive and it was  
authentic, I could vouch for that, based on my now growing  
115
John Francis Kinsella
experience  in  France  with  my  gourmet  guide  Monsieur  
Fourneron. 
Later that evening as I switched from one TV channel to  
another  I  heard  the  echoes  of  sirens  of  police  cars  and  
ambulances from the streets far below me. I looked out the  
window at the lights of the skyscrapers, nearby was the PanAm  
building, below the streets were filled with traffic, it was a  
scene reminiscent of one of the many American crime series I  
had watched on TV since I was a youngster, but this time it was  
real thing.
At the end of 1967, America society was still the model to be  
emulated by all those who believed in Western democracy. It  
was still the world’s leading superpower in spite of the claims  
and gesticulations of the USSR with its nuclear arsenal and  
fearsome Red Army. 
The  war  in  Vietnam  was  building  up  to  its  climax  with  
Lyndon Johnson, who, claiming the desire to de-escalate the  
conflict,  was  sending  more  and  more  troops  to  fight  the  
Communist Vietcong, which unknown to the Americans was  
making  their  ultimate  preparations  for  the  largest  military  
operation of the war up to that point in time, the deadly Tet  
Offensive, a  coordinated strike  against  military and civilian  
command and control centres throughout South Vietnam. 
With Flower Power symbolizing youth’s passive resistance to  
the war I felt unconcerned and was more occupied with my  
own life, earning enough money to pay for my house and car,  
116A Traveller’s Tales
enough money to pay for my holidays…and figuring out where  
I could go for my next trip.
I was no longer interested by the Beatles who had released  
their album Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. My  
interests  were  more  drawn  to  Desmond  Morris’ book  The  
Naked Ape, and my admiration went out to Israel after their  
six-day war against the combined forces of Egypt and Syria.
The next day after my first delicious American breakfast,  
discovering the meaning of easy-over and sunnyside up, and  
leaving  another  twenty  five  cent  tip,  I  booked  out  of  the  
Biltmore and took taxi to Newark Airport where I checked in  
for a flight to Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania. 
I was picked up on arrival by the sales manager of our new  
partner  and  driven  to  the  Hilton  in  the  city  centre.  That  
afternoon, at their offices, I was introduced to a sales engineer  
who was to accompany me on a series of visits to installations  
in  the  Appalachian  Basin,  a  coal  rich  region  running  from  
north-east to south-west in the east coast states.
That evening I was invited to a National Hockey League  
match. The Pittsburgh Penguins were playing at home to a full  
house.  The  lights  and  colours  were  unbelievable,  the  noise  
deafening,  not  only  from  the  crowd,  but  also  from  the  
commentator and the music that accompanied each attack. I  
had never seen an ice hockey match and understood nothing of  
the rules. The game was played in three twenty minute periods  
and the clock stopped for each incident. Jet lag was catching up  
117John Francis Kinsella
on me and the game seemed to go on forever as I tried to keep  
my eyes open, smiling as I feigned interest. 
The next day we flew to Tri-Cities Regional Airport, situated  
in  Tennessee  at  the  strategic  junction  with  West  Virginia,  
Kentucky and North Carolina. We hired a Plymouth Valiant  
and over the next days visited mines and coal terminals where  
we saw the coal dryers in action. The dried coal was loaded  
onto trains, one hundred wagons long, each wagon containing  
one hundred tons of coal, and delivered to the steel mills of  
Pittsburgh and coal burning power stations across the USA. 
When the coal arrived at the surface of the mines it was  
washed, that is to say separated from non-combustible rock. At  
the exit of this process the coal was wet, containing between  
ten and twenty percent water which was of course no value to  
the coal company, and costly to haul hundreds of miles across  
the country.
I remembered the hit song of 1955,  Sixteen Tons , sung by  
Tennessee Ernie Ford, which reached number one in the UK  
charts. I never understood what the words of the chorus meant  
until I visited those mines:
You load sixteen tons, what do you get?
Another day older and deeper in debt.
Saint Peter, don't you call me, 'cause I can't go;
I owe my soul to the company store.
I saw poor miners and their families standing before their  
modest woodcabins in the cold, damp and grey landscape that  
118A Traveller’s Tales
reminded me of the photos I had seen of the Great Depression.  
Those  same  families  bought  their  supplies  in  the  company  
store, which were even more poorly stocked in the choice of  
goods than those  I was to see  in stores in the  Communist  
German Democratic Republic two months later.
We overnighted in motels and drank beer in local bars. The  
bars were mostly noisy and also served hard drinks. One of  
them had a small bowling alley where a couple of drinkers we  
had got talking to challenged each other to a game. It ended in  
a  raucous  dispute  with  the  two  men  ready  to  settle  their  
difference in a fight, it took all of those present to bring them  
back to reason. One was a doctor the other a salesman. I was  
taken aback and alarmed to witness a real live tough guy scene,  
it was straight out of a Western, with both men ready to slug it  
out over a game of bowls. 
I was surprised at my counterpart’s ignorance of Europe, but I  
was equally as ignorant of life in the USA, though I had the  
benefit of having been fed on American films for the best part  
of my life. 
The  following weekend back in back in Pittsburgh I was  
shown the sights by the sales manager and invited to his home  
for lunch on the Sunday, and to watch an American football  
match on his colour TV . His home was to my mind luxurious,  
vastly more spacious than somebody of a similar position at  
home. He had a son of about twenty who was not present for  
lunch, but turned up mid-afternoon. There was obviously some  
kind  of  father-son  conflict  going  on  and  the  tension  was  
palpable. The dialogue was like a replay of a scene in  Rebel  
119John Francis Kinsella
Without a Cause , which starred James Dean, Jim Baccus who  
played Dean’s father, and Natalie Wood.
After  a  visit  to  a  couple  of  Pittsburgh  steel  mills  and  
discussions with the company’s engineers concerning our plan  
for a pilot plant, which they did not really see the use of since it  
could  not  demonstrate  anything  that  had  not  already  be  
demonstrated, I flew back to New York.
Walt Burkhard was there to meet me again and show me the  
sights before I left. We visited the Rockefeller Center, where  
we saw the Radio City Rockets, Broadway and the other sights.
I arrived back in London on December 22, just in time for the  
Christmas  festivities  in  the  office,  where  I  got  a  hero’s  
welcome from my younger colleagues. The old hands, with few  
exceptions,  were  not  so  pleased  to  see  this  upstart  forging  
ahead.
Sturtevant’ s works in Manchester
120
A Traveller’s Tales
In March 1969, I found myself at the Leipzig Trade Fair, in  
East  Germany, to discuss a  product  I knew almost  nothing  
about, a system for packaging carbon black. Our managing  
director did not have much confidence in the ability of his  
engineers to promote our products. Once again I was off to  
another country I knew little or nothing about, the German  
Democratic Republic, not that I knew much of the German  
Federal Republic.
On this occasion I flew into West Berlin Tempelhof Airport in  
the US controlled sector and took a taxi to Check Point Charlie.  
The  famous  check  point  was  composed  of  a  couple  of  
prefabricated  cabins  and  a  barrier  across  the  single  lane  
passage for motor vehicles. A panel in languages of the four  
occupying powers warned me that I was leaving the American  
zone.
The  Americans  were  in  full  parade  dress,  their  boots  
incredibly  bright  and  smoothly  polished.  They  checked  my  
passport and waved me through. The German side was guarded  
by Russians, whose boots were equally as well polished as the  
Americans.  There  I  was  scrutinized  and  questioned  after  
producing my passport, visa and a letter of invitation to the  
Leizig Fair.
I took the U-bahn to Schönefeld Airport where I was booked  
on an Interflug flight to Leipzig. At the check-in desk I was  
spotted  by  the  representative  of  the  British  firm  who  was  
travelling on the same flight and who was to accompany me  
during my visit. Tony Gurton worked for a commodity trading  
121John Francis Kinsella
firm that was selling carbon black to the East Germans, used in  
the manufacture of motor vehicle tyres.
Night had fallen when we arrived in Leipzig, there we took a  
taxi  to the  Auslanders Treffpunkte , where  foreigners had to  
report to register and be allocated a room during their stay in  
the city. The Leipzig Trade Fair was a showcase of socialist  
achievement for the Soviet bloc and foreigners alike, as a result  
the city’s hotels were booked out at least two years in advance  
and the hope of finding a room for an unplanned short visit was  
zero.
The East German authorities therefore requisitioned rooms in  
its citizens’ homes. There was no private property, all homes  
belonged to the state. During an interminable wait, my guide  
Tony took the opportunity to visit the duty free shop. Yes, to  
one side of the booking office was a duty free shop, curiously  
filled with not only cigarettes and alcohol, but also coffee,  
butter,  eggs,  jam  and  all  the  other  foodstuffs  found  in  
supermarkets at home.
To my surprise he stocked up with a large jar of Nescafé, half  
a dozen eggs, a pound of butter and a pot of strawberry jam. It  
was after ten in evening when we were given an address on a  
small slip of paper. We got into a waiting taxi and handed the  
driver the address. 
The  damp  cobble  streets  reflected  the  thin  light  from  the  
sparse street lamps and after fifteen or so minutes we pulled up  
before  a  dismal  looking  block  of  flats  where  we  were  
abandoned by the taxi. 
122A Traveller’s Tales
In the dim light we found the name on a letter box in the  
shabby entrance hall and made our way to the fifth floor where  
after ringing for what seemed like an eternity the door was  
suspiciously cracked open. An elderly couple inspected the slip  
of paper, then invited us in.
Tony handed them the shopping bag filled with the supplies  
and after waiting a quarter of an hour we were shown the  
bedroom, which was evidently their own, still warm, freshly  
made-up double bed. We were tired and in spite of the strange  
surroundings and curious arrangement were soon sound asleep.
The next morning we were woken by the smell of coffee. The  
breakfast  table  was  set  with  fresh  bread,  butter,  eggs  and  
strawberry jam. Tony, an experienced traveller to the Leipzig  
Trade Fair, had wisely stocked up on the food that was in short  
supply for ordinary citizens of the DDR. As for myself I was  
quickly discovering the how Eastern Europe functioned for its  
common citizens.
123John Francis Kinsella
16
 month later we were on our way back to Poland, this  
time by road, and this time joined by Bob Wright, who  
had figured it would be cheaper (and certainly more fun) to  
travel by road. We left England from Southend Airport taking a  
Silver City Bristol Freighter, a strange looking aircraft with a  
bulbous front end that carried three or four cars and a dozen  
passengers seated in metal framed canvas bucket seats on an  
upper deck. There were three of us Bob Wright, Les Pazowski  
and myself at the wheel once we landed at Ostend in Belgium.A
The Hillman Gazelle
We travelled in Bob’s company car, a new Hillman Gazelle.  
The weather was gray and damp as we headed north-east via  
Antwerp,  Eindhoven,  crossing  into  West  Germany,  then  
bypassing  Essen,  Dortmund,  Hannover  and  Braunschweig,  
124
A Traveller’s Tales
arriving at the DDR Grenzübergang at Helmstedt-Marienborn.  
There  at  the  border  checkpoint  we  presented  our  passports  
bearing Polish visas and transit visas to the East German-Polish  
border  at  Frankfurt  an  der  Oder,  two  hundred  and  fifty  
kilometres to the east on the A2 autobahn.
We  were  inspected  by  the  police,  all  the  baggage  was  
removed from the boot, the seats were checked for contraband,  
the underside of the Hillman was examined with mirrors on  
wheels,  and  the  petrol  tank  checked  with  metal  probe  for  
hidden compartments. 
Once we were on our way again we had to maintain a steady  
speed, we had exactly three hours to reach the border with  
Poland, and no stopping. It was no problem traffic was scarce,  
so scarce in fact that grass was growing between the joints in  
the concrete slabs of the motorway.
The procedure was repeated on leaving East Germany. After  
entering Poland the autobahn ended abruptly, giving way to a  
road that wound its way through towns and villages mixed with  
local traffic and farmers horse drawn wagons. We turned south  
in  the  direction  of  Krakow  with  more  than  450  hundred  
kilometres of poor roads ahead of us, through Wroclaw and  
finally arriving in Krakow late the same evening.
We checked-in to a different hotel this time, the Cracovia, a  
vast, newly built establishment. It was impressively modern  
and we were surprised and pleased with its facilities. The next  
three days, including Saturday morning were spent visiting the  
offices of the different institutes responsible for investment in  
125John Francis Kinsella
the  mining  industry,  including  engineering,  chemical  and  
mining bodies.
Saturday evening we dined in the restaurant of the Cracovia  
where we were spotted by the director of the chemical institute  
who was dinning there with his wife and friends. Was it a  
coincidence, probably not. After our meal we ordered coffee,  
which arrived accompanied by three  glasses of cognac, the  
waiter  informing  us  they  were  offered  by  the  director.  We  
raised our glasses to him and his party. Fifteen minutes later we  
returned the complement.
Les then made his way over to the director’s table and after a  
few  moments  of  low  voiced  conversation,  returned  and  
informed us we were going to the nightclub situated at a lower  
level of the hotel. There we settled ourselves in and were soon  
joined by the director and his party. 
A riotous evening of drinking followed. Finally the nightclub  
closed and we all made our way to Bob Wright’s room and  
continued our party. By this time the wife of the director had  
taken a liking to Bob and as she spoke no English she asked me  
in French to tell him, he had marvelously blue eyes. I didn’t  
want a misunderstanding and as I struggled to find the right  
words  the  phone  rang,  it  was  the  reception  to  say  the  
neighbouring  rooms  were  complaining  of  the  noise.  We  
continued with less noise, but the cognac got the better of us  
and the phone rang again to announce the night manager was  
arriving.
126A Traveller’s Tales
We ran into the corridor and hid in the stairwell watching the  
night manager and his assistant arrive to discover the room was  
empty  then  once  they  were  gone  we  promptly  returned  to  
continue our party. 
It was after four in the morning when I returned to my room.  
It was impossible to consider turning in, the room was turning  
like a top. I opened the large window that pivoted on a vertical  
axis and sat on the couch with the cold air wafting over me.
It must have been seven when I awoke, covered in a crust of  
snow.  The  temperature  outside  was  below  freezing  and  the  
street lay under a thick blanket of fresh snow.
It  was  Sunday  and  after  a  little  breakfast  we  set  out  for  
Jelenia Góra, a ski resort in the Tatra Mountain Range, part of  
the  Carpathians,  near  the  Polish-Czech  border.  The  pristine  
snow sparkled under the cloudless blue sky, as I sat silently  
nursing a hangover and a splitting headache
Arriving in the ski resort of Zakopane we took a colourful  
horse  drawn  sleigh  up  through  the  forest  to  a  mountain  
restaurant. I sat with my back to the horse, its tail flicking my  
head under a volley of loud farts expulsed by the beasts efforts  
to pull the fully laden sleigh through the ruts up the mountain. 
Once arrived at the summit we took lunch in a restaurant that  
offered us a magnificent panoramic view of the mountain and  
the dark green pine forest that bordered the ski trails. However,  
when the borscht was served with fresh cream, one look was  
enough to turn my stomach, and I spent the remainder of the  
127John Francis Kinsella
time sitting on the steps outside the restaurant waiting for my  
head to clear.
Walking  through  the  snow  a  couple  of  hours  later  I  was  
feeling better and overwhelmed by the magnificent view. It was  
my first visit to such a winter landscape and I was enchanted  
by the  skiers who glided gracefully past  swishing over the  
sparkling powdered snow.
Over the next few days we fell into a routine, heading for the  
Konditorei after our afternoon meetings, where we ate cream  
cakes and pastries and then visited the shops. Much to our  
amusement Bob mistook the price of one hundred grams of  
caviar  as  the  price  for  one  kilo.  We  bought  vodka  and  
souvenirs. I opted for a crystal decanter, and like my visit to  
Prague had to sort through more than a dozen flawed examples  
before I found one with a straight neck. Communist quality had  
a long way to go.
Our return journey through the dull gray February landscape  
of Germany and Holland was an anti-climax after our nine days  
in Southern Poland.
*  *  *
August 4, 1968, was a Sunday, and as I flew in low over the  
fjord to Oslo on my BEA flight, I was astonished to see people  
sunning themselves in shorts and bikinis on the small rocky  
islands that dotted the approach to the Norwegian capital. I was  
dressed in a rather thick suit totally unadapted for the hot spell  
that had descended over Scandinavia. To make matters worse  
128A Traveller’s Tales
the office had been unable to make a hotel reservation and the  
only room the airport tourist desk could find for me was in the  
students’ residence at the University of Oslo.
The next day I moved to a small hotel near the city port,  
which  when  I  ordered  a  beer  with  my  evening  meal  I  
discovered was a religious abstinence hotel. I should have been  
forewarned as to my surprise grace said in Norwegian, just as I  
about to tuck in to dinner. The following morning I checked out  
and found a less forbidding hotel on Stortingsgata in the city  
centre. 
In Oslo I met existing customers and discussed the crushing  
machinery  for  the  mining  industry  they  had  bought  from  
Sturtevant. It was not a good time for British industry that was  
facing fast growing competition from American and European  
manufacturers with new machines and better service. 
That evening I dined in the restaurant of the Grand Hotel  
where I tried their lamb cutlets and French fries, I returned  
there many times over the years and always ordered the same  
meal. 
I realized I would not have much success alone and through  
one of our contacts located a firm that could represent us in  
Norway  and  met  their  manager  Christian  Cullum  for  a  
presentation.  There was not much else happening Oslo in mid-
summer so I moved on to Stockholm where I also found a  
potential  agent.  Then  I  explored  the  city  in  the  summer  
sunshine.
129John Francis Kinsella
My  next  stop  was  Helsinki  where I stayed at the Vaakuna  
Hotel, facing the main railway station, an impressive edifice in  
dark red granite, an unexpectedly fierce version of the early  
twentieth century romantic style of architecture, adorned with  
huge statues and a green copper roof, all of which left lasting  
and rather stern impression of Finland on me.
Finland,  though  fully  independent,  was  then  under  the  
shadow of the Soviet Union, known as Finlandization, which  
demanded unfailing neutrality in matters of foreign affairs vis-
a-vis the policies of the Soviet Union. With the Soviet frontier  
along the full length of their eastern border, Finland had little  
choice in the matter.
Helsinki Railway Station architecture
On a visit to the city of Hamina on the south-east coast of  
Finland, facing the Gulf of Finland, I was given a guided tour  
130
A Traveller’s Tales
the country’s forbidding frontier with Russia by our Finnish  
representative. A dauntingly high electrified fence marked by  
watch  towers,  permanently  manned  by  armed  guards,  an  
experience that sent a shiver down my spine as I caught my  
first glance of what Ronald Reagan was to call the Evil Empire.
It may seem strange well-over seven decades later, but from  
the age when I started to decipher the headlines of the Daily  
Mirror, which came through our letter box each morning, I  
became  aware  of  the  Soviets,  their  atomic  bomb  and  the  
Communist threat to our very existence. Newspapers regularly  
announced  nuclear  tests,  each  time  bigger  and  more  
threatening, bigger and better missiles that could reach every  
corner of the planet, describing the destruction that would be  
wrought and the ensuing nuclear winter.
At  the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen  I  imagined  Russian  
parachutists breaking into our flat and my instant conversion to  
Communism to save my skin, a possibility that appeared all the  
more realistic when Nikita Kruschev hammered on the rostrum  
at  the  United  Nations  in  New  York  with  his  shoe,  angrily  
driving a point home and threatening the Western world.
It is difficult to image today, but there was an underlying fear  
of  Russia,  the  Soviet  Union,  and  when  we  saw  Nikita  
Khrushchev in full crisis mode in New York, as the Cuban  
Crisis  threatened  us  with  nuclear  destruction  after  Russian  
ships  loaded  with  intercontinental  ballistic  missiles  were  
sighted in mid-Atlantic on their way to Castro’s revolutionary  
Cuba. 
131John Francis Kinsella
When Kennedy announced his ultimatum to the Soviets it  
was evening in London and that night I had difficulty sleeping,  
would it be Armageddon as politicians and scientists had been  
telling us for a decade, was it to be the end of the world.
When the Kruschev pulled back the relief was enormous, it  
was  probably  the  culminating  point  of  the  Cold  War  that  
nevertheless continued almost unabated for three more decades  
until Mikhail Gorbachev dissolved the URSS in the last days of  
1991.
My visits to Eastern Europe had confirmed that the threat  
really  existed  and  even  more  so  when  Russian  tanks  had  
crushed the call for freedom in Prague that very same spring.
We had a Finnish agent who was more open to my message  
than  the  Norwegians  or  Swedes.  He  organised  visits  to  
potential customers and took me to lunch in a businessman’s  
luncheon club, off Mannerheimintie, where we drank beer and  
ate a variety of pickled herrings. Finland’s industrialisation was  
underway  and  they  were  keen  to  obtain  licenses  for  new  
technology. I was not sure what we had to offer them as by  
now I realized that our manufacturing plant and R&D centre in  
Manchester were not the most modern in Europe, but the Finns  
took the ball and ran with it, investing in new research and  
development and becoming market leaders as I was to discover  
decades  later  when  I  joined  one  of  the  largest  machinery  
manufacturing groups in Finland, a world market leader.
One evening I was taken to the Kaivohuoni, an impressively  
big restaurant in the Brunnsparken, a ten minute taxi ride from  
132A Traveller’s Tales
my hotel. In addition to the restaurant there was a dance floor, a  
band and a bar. It was packed by businessmen from the East  
and West —Finns, Russians, Germans and many others, all of  
whom were determined to have a good time once business talk  
was over. 
The Kaivohuoni
There were plenty of Finnish girls who had a totally different  
attitude to enjoying themselves compared back home. It was at  
the same time old-fashioned, modern and Eastern European.  
They never refused a dance when invited whatever the age of  
their cavalier and whatever his state  of sobriety. It  was an  
extraordinary experience for me, a young Englishman, well  
dressed, able to afford what was an expensive restaurant and  
the price of drinks at the bar.
That November I was back in Helsinki where Black-Clawson
—a leading UK paper machine builder, a customer of ours, had  
133
John Francis Kinsella
organised a seminar for its clients. I got myself invited along  
and on arrival at the Vaakuna Hotel, met my counterparts in the  
bar on the top floor overlooking the square with the imposing  
railway station and trams. The scene was magic. Everything  
was white, covered in about a foot snow that remained white in  
spite of the passing slow moving traffic.
After dinner I proudly displayed my worldliness inviting the  
Black-Clawson team to the Kaivohuoni. It was a great success.  
I made my mark as an experienced business traveller and for  
the rest of the week, once formal business was concluded, we  
continued in the city’s bars and nightclubs, cementing relations  
between Black-Clawson and Sturtevant in the process.
I also visited Copenhagen where I found few opportunities  
for the kind of business we were seeking. Denmark was not an  
industrial  country,  it  had  no  mines  or  forests  and  for  me  
became no more than a transit point for my travels to and from  
Scandinavia.
134A Traveller’s Tales
17
he next spring I decided to visit my Scandinavian clients  
by road and borrowing Bob Wright’s Hillman Gazelle set  
off on my trip. Through Belgium, Holland and Germany to  
Copenhagen where I took the car ferry from Helsingor across  
the narrow straits to Helsingborg in Sweden. I then made my  
way up along the east coast of Sweden to Norway where I  
stopped in Oslo.T
It was much easier with our newly appointed agent, Christian  
Cullum, who organised hotels and visits, and who also invited  
me for a weekend in the mountains to the north of Oslo, where  
with his friends they had organised an outing with their bird  
dogs  in  preparation  for  the  opening  of  the  game  shooting  
season.
We spent the weekend in a hotel, three to a room plus the  
dogs.  We  hiked  through  the  mountains  over  a  waterlogged  
tundra-like landscape where the bird dogs and shooters had a  
great  time  with  me  following  as  best  I  could,  totally  
unequipped for the adventure and protected from the wind by a  
thin anorak Christian had loaned me. I was glad to get back to  
my hotel in the city centre.
I then headed east across Sweden to Stockholm where after  
meeting with our agent took the night ferry across the Baltic to  
Turku  in  Finland.  During  the  crossing  I  made  friends  with  
another UK traveller, he was the rather upper-class owner of a  
135John Francis Kinsella
family owned textile company that manufactured men’s socks,  
peddling his wares to good men’s outfitters. It surprised me he  
could make a living from selling socks so far from home, but  
he evidently did, and a good one at that.
* * *
Little of what happened in the outside world in 1968 affected  
the man in the street in the UK, however, it was a tumultuous  
year. That was nothing unusual, it had always been like that,  
though thanks to the press, radio and television, the general  
public  was  better  informed  than  in  the  past.  But  the  state  
controlled  BBC  radio  and  television  dominated  the  
broadcasting media and the press generally more focused on  
home events, the world was reduced to the BBC’s often brief  
headline news.
Of course The Times and certain radio programmes for those  
informed provided detailed reporting, but  for the  most  part  
serious news was composed of football and cricket results, the  
Queen’s  visits  and  Harold  Wilson  dreary  government  
announcements.
The year 1968, was a tumultuous year, a tumultuous year in a  
tumultuous decade. In spite of my travels the political impact  
of some of those great events was to a certain extent was lost  
on me, though there was a realisation that what was happening  
beyond the shores of the UK could impact on my life.
The first event occurred in May, when France was brought to  
a halt by a one of the most extensive general strikes to have  
136A Traveller’s Tales
occurred  in  its  history  coupled  with  a  violent  almost  
revolutionary movement  in the  streets of Paris. Events that  
caused France’s greatest leader in modern history, General De  
Gaulle,  to  stumble,  quitting  the  capital  in  great  haste  by  
military helicopter. 
The second event occurred on the night of 20-21 August,  
when four Warsaw Pact countries invaded Czechoslovakia with  
two  hundred  thousand  troops  and  two  thousand  tanks.  The  
Prague Spring had come to a brutal end, in bloodshed and  
killing,  and  the  sympathetic  Dubcek  was  put  under  house  
arrested.
I was now reading ‘quality’ newspapers and the international  
press. Amongst some of the astonishing things I discovered  
was  Britain’s  ‘special  relationship’ with  the  USA was  not  
unique. Looking at an English language news programme in  
Norway there was a report on the visit of the country’s prime  
minister  to  Washington.  The  Norwegian  prime  minister  
announced that his country’s traditional ‘special relationship’  
with  the  USA would  continue  to  be  a  cornerstone  of  his  
government’s  foreign  policy.  Wait  a  minute,  I  thought,  
indignant at such a presumption, who is this guy. Doesn’t he  
know that only the UK has such a ‘special relationship’ with  
Washington. 
Little by little I discovered that every country boasted of its  
‘special relationship’ with the USA. That said, I was surprised  
that the Americans I met on my visit to the USA, knew so little  
about the outside world, and even less about UK, apart from  
the Queen and some confused memories about the war.
137John Francis Kinsella
It was also the year of the Tet Offensive. Then Martin Luther  
King’ assassination, followed by that of Robert Kennedy. It  
was the year of the Munich Olympics. The year Richard Nixon  
was elected 37th president of the USA. And on December 21,  
Apollo 8 was launched on man’s first  mission to orbit  the  
Moon.
But the impact of those events was of secondary importance  
to me as I discovered Europe for myself, not as a tourist, but as  
a budding businessman, planning my different trips to Europe,  
and how what happened concerned my job, my future and my  
life.
I continued to be an enthusiastic reader and having graduated  
from Arthur C. Clark and Isaac Asimov in the late fifties early  
sixties to Plutarch, Tacitus and Xenophon, which had echoes of  
other worlds, I was now into history, the origins of man, and  
‘good’ fiction. My travels and my generous expense account  
gave  me  almost  unlimited  access  to  airport  news  stands,  
English language bookshops in foreign cities, museums and  
historical sites. Business travel was not a one day affair, mobile  
phones and Internet were for science fiction.
Most of 1969, was a continuation of my travels in Europe. It  
also saw the construction of a large scale pilot fluidised bed  
coal  dryer  in  Sturtevant’s  R&D  centre  in  Manchester.  The  
technical results were not positive, the coal was too wet and the  
economics were not good, either because distances from the pit  
head to steel mills or because power stations were evidently  
smaller  than  in  the  USA  and  perhaps  more  importantly  
international frontiers were still closed.
138A Traveller’s Tales
The pilot plant in Manchester
Benjamin  Sturtevant,  an  American  engineer  started  his  
business in England in 1884 after a visit to London, where he  
was was represented by George Augustus Mower, an MIT grad  
from  Wisconsin.  Soon  Sturtevant  was  represented  in  Paris,  
Berlin,  and  Stockholm.  The  company  continued  until  2016  
139
John Francis Kinsella
when  it  closed  down  after  a  long  decline,  when  UK  
engineering abandoned it long tradition and the sun finally set  
on Britain’s heavy machinery manufacturing industry as it had  
been known since the industrial revolution.
140A Traveller’s Tales
18
n the meantime, in the autumn of 1969, my mentor, Bob  
Wright,  announced  to  my  great  surprise  he  was  leaving  
Sturtevant’s.  He  was  hired  to  manage  AirIndustrie,  a  
Lancashire based manufacturing subsidiary of the French Indo-
Suez Group of companies. I felt orphaned, but I needn’t have  
worried, he was not gone two months when he called me and  
invited me with my wife, Ann, to visit him in Southport for a  
long weekend.I
The North of England was almost as foreign to me as Europe,  
even though I had travelled extensively to almost all regions of  
the UK and Ireland. The country was the same, but the people  
were different. My experience told me that not only did I see  
them  as being different, but  they saw me  as being equally  
different.
Southport, a seaside town, was mildly interesting, a sedate  
resort town twenty miles to the north of Liverpool with its  
Victorian architecture intact. Besides the restaurants and pubs,  
there was the Royal Birkedale Golf Club for the well-off and  
for the  rest  there  was the  pier and the  kind of amusement  
arcades English seaside towns all have. 
The seashore was not attractive, at low tide the sea withdrew  
to the horizon leaving what could only be described as a vast  
mudflat. The weather was damp and dreary.
141John Francis Kinsella
Bob offered me a job as manager of a new department he  
planned. The salary was fifty percent higher and the idea of  
working for a French firm appealed to me. Ann was not so  
enthusiastic as we had invested a larger house in a better part of  
Hornchurch in Essex two years earlier.
Rockingham Avenue Hornchurch Essex
We moved to Southport in early January 1970 and I started  
work in the recently built facilities, offices and workshops in  
Skelmersdale, an industrial park that lay about twenty miles  
outside  of  Southport.  Almost  immediately  I  headed  for  
AirIndustrie in Paris with Bob Wright where I was introduced  
to my new colleagues and the processes they expected me to  
sell in EFTA and the Commonwealth countries. The myth of  
the  Commonwealth  market  still  persisted  in  spite  of  the  
changes  that  were  transforming  world  markets  and  the  
impending adhesion of the UK to the EU.
The French firm was dynamic, its fine new eight story office  
building situated in the new business centre of La Defense that  
142
A Traveller’s Tales
was going up in the north of Paris with manufacturing plants  
across  France  and  references  worldwide.  Business  literally  
poured in, a striking contrast to Sturtevant, a long established  
engineering business whose products and marketing had barely  
evolved in the difficult context of British engineering which  
had little enthusiasm from the government.
That spring of 1970, we holidayed in Italy, driving to Rome  
in the large new car that came with the job. Then on returning  
to the office I received an urgent call from Martin Chiono, one  
of  my  more  senior  colleagues  in  Paris  to  join  him  for  a  
negotiation in Vancouver. They had replied to a call for tenders  
for a new paper pulp mill in New Zealand and were invited to  
Canada by the consulting engineers engaged to manage the  
project. Martin needed me as his English was not sufficiently  
good for the presentation of our offer along with the technical  
and commercial conditions.
We arrived in Vancouver and stayed at the Sheraton Hotel.  
We were met by our Canadian partners with whom we had a  
licensing  agreement  and  who  were  after  the  same  business  
themselves. The discussions with the customer’s engineering  
consultant rapidly dispensed with our Canadian partners as it  
was more advantageous to manufacture the plant in the UK  
under the control of our French owners.
After our first visit to Canada for technical discussions we  
were  called back for the  final  commercial  negotiations and  
were chosen as suppliers. We were euphoric as it was a multi-
million  dollar  deal,  one  of  the  largest  the  firm  had  ever  
received for that kind of system. 
143John Francis Kinsella
We  still  had  many  details  to  settle,  but  first,  that  Friday  
evening we celebrated our success at Trader Vic’s, a Polynesian  
style  restaurant.  The  cocktails  were  exotic  and  the  food  
delicious.  That  Saturday  morning  we  hired  a  red  Plymouth  
Barracuda and left to spend the weekend in the Rockies at  
Okanagan Lake.
An airborne pulp dryer 
I was uneasy with the steering of the Barracuda, it was totally  
unlike my V olvo or any other European car. We stopped for  
lunch in a small town and I ordered a roast turkey lunch, but  
was disappointed, the turkey was reconstituted and flavourless.  
We  returned  to  Vancouver  Sunday  evening  and  dined  at  a  
seafood restaurant overlooking the harbour where we enjoyed  
lobster and drank a delicious Californian white  wine.
The following week, one evening after our discussions, we  
were relaxing in the Sheraton lounge bar, where two drinkers  
got  into  an  argument.  It  reminded  me  of  the  scene  I  had  
witnessed in the Appalachians two or three years earlier. They  
were seated at a nearby table, two respectable looking guys in  
144
A Traveller’s Tales
their late thirties or early forties. Finally one grabbed the other  
by the collar and pulled him through the bar to settle their  
difference outside. A few minutes later he returned looking  
worse for wear. He sat down calmly finished his drink, paid,  
and  left  as  if  nothing  had  happened,  like  in  John  Wayne  
Western. Martin and I were astonished, but the incident was a  
reminder of how different North Americans were from us.
The Barracuda
I returned home in triumph. The firm’s order book was full. I  
could  do  no  wrong  and  had  a  free  hand  to  seek  out  new  
business, wherever I thought it may lay and however far away  
that was, between Skelmersdale and New Zealand, which was  
as far as one could get.
One of the business trip was relatively near, Austria, when I  
took off in early July to discuss the supply of a cellophane  
process in the small town of Lenzing. The nearest airport was  
in Salzberg, it was then a small airport and after the morning  
rush it closed. I was with a colleague, Barry Simmonds, and we  
145
John Francis Kinsella
were  to be  picked up on arrival  by a  car provided by our  
customer. 
We waited, but there was no sign of the driver. It was ten  
thirty in the morning and the airport was about to close when  
an Austrian approached us and asked in very broken English if  
we were waiting for a car for Lenzing. Neither Barry or myself  
spoke a word of German and we followed the driver. On arrival  
in Lenzing, fifty kilometres from the airport, the car reported to  
the factory gate where we were met by a couple of engineers. A  
confused discussion ensued and it took several phone calls to  
sort out the problem. We had taken the wrong car and were in  
the wrong place. 
Two different companies had sent cars to Salzberg to pick up  
different Englishmen. Our customer’s driver had picked up the  
first two Englishmen he found, not us, and we were picked up  
by the second driver.
We stayed in a delightful small hotel overlooking the Attersee  
and were invited that evening by the engineering manager for  
drinks at  his home  not  far from  the  factory. The  area  was  
famous for its cherries and it was the middle of the season. We  
ate fresh cherries and cherry tart accompanied by excellent  
Austrian  white  wine  late  into  the  evening  with  our  new  
acquaintences and a couple of months later signed a contract.
In the meantime we took the train from Salzburg to Munich  
where we visited the city and drank a couple of steins of good  
Bavarian beer before flying back to Manchester.
146A Traveller’s Tales
Flying in those days was uncomplicated. There were only  
national carriers and service was good with food and drinks  
served on international flights. Generally, whenever I could I  
took BEA, it was easier, they spoke English and I knew what I  
was getting.
The market area we covered was limited by our French parent  
company,  EFTA  countries  and  the  Commonwealth.  
Scandinavia and Austria were logical places to visit, but there  
was also Portugal and I set about looking for a customer there  
and found a paper pulp mill situated in Coimbra, it was run by  
an  Englishman,  William  Bailey,  whose  family  had  lived  in  
Portugal for generations. Portugal was England’s oldest ally  
and many long established British families were producers and  
exporters of Porto wines.
The morning after our meeting at the company’s head office  
in Lisbon we travelled to the mill about one hundred kilometres  
north nearby the town of Constância. The mill produced paper  
pulp from wood harvested in the nearby Eucalyptus forests. It  
was a small mill built by a torrent in a steep and narrow valley  
which originally powered the machinery. It was difficult to  
expand, but I convinced the management we could find the  
space to extend their drying process which was the bottleneck  
to increased production. 
This resulted in a contract and several visits to the mill where  
I often lunched in the guest house, which dated back to the  
founding of the mill a century earlier, an elegant Empire style  
home, served with excellent Portuguese wines.
147John Francis Kinsella
On two occasions I stayed at the Ritz in Lisbon and spent the  
weekend in Estoril where  I drank Vinho Verde and ate fresh  
prawns.
In the nineties I renewed my contacts in Lisbon when a silver  
mine was planned in the south of the country. I found a local  
company trading company run by an Anglo-Portguese family  
in Lisbon to represent us. It was run by two brothers whom, as  
I  had  discovered  with  the  Caima  business,  could  flip  from  
being Portuguese to British at the drop of a hat.
Today - The ruins of Caima Pulp Mill abandooned in 1993
In 1995, with Françoise and our three children we drove from  
Hendaye to Portugal in my new V olvo 740, where we stayed at  
the Albatros Hotel in  Cascais near  Estoril. It was part of a  
summer vacation that took us to Rabat in Morocco, where we  
met-up with Laurant David, and from there returned via my  
sister’s place in Denia near Benidorm in Spain.
148
A Traveller’s Tales
The children still remember the Albatross, originally built in  
1873  as  a  summer  house  for  the  Dukes  of  Loulé.  The  
handsome white-washed villa was topped by red clay tiles with  
views  over  the  ocean  and  a  terrace  with  a  magnificent  
swimming pool perched on a low cliff overlooking the sea.
149John Francis Kinsella
19
arly the following year, I took off New Zealand to meet  
our client Tasman Pulp & Paper, a large mill near Rotarua  
on the North Island. I could have taken a flight directly to New  
Zealand, however in those days there was no ‘direct’ flight,  
there were many stops on the way, either for refuelling or for  
joining passengers.E
Paris informed me that there was a project in South Africa  
and getting out the Atlas of the world and an airline schedule I  
discovered I could fly to Johannesburg and from there continue  
on to Australia and New Zealand via Mauritius in the Indian  
Ocean.  I  contacted  the  firm’s  agent  in  South  Africa  and  
arranged a visit.
Sunday, January 16, 1972 I boarded the flight to South Africa  
at Manchester Airport, stopping in Athens, Cairo and Kampala  
before arriving in Johannesburg the next day. There Malcolm  
Geber our agent met me and the next day we headed east by  
road,  destination  Mbabane  in  Swaziland,  three  hundred  
kilometres at high speed over roads that saw little traffic. I was  
relieved  when  a  police  officer  jumped  out  of  a  ditch  from  
behind a lone eucalyptus tree in the middle of the bush and  
waved Malcolm down for speeding. He got a stiff fine and we  
continued our journey a little slower.
Swaziland was an independent state, a kingdom, with its own  
borders, where our passports were stamped. Malcolm informed  
150A Traveller’s Tales
me that many South African Whites crossed the border for sex  
with Black women and gambling. In those days South Africa’s  
apartheid laws forbade sex between different races…as well as  
gambling.
On our return to Johannesburg I persuaded Malcolm to take  
me to Soweto, then a vast shanty town with police check points  
and a chicane at its entry. Malcolm drove fast ready to pull out  
the pistol he wore if things became dangerous. He recounted  
many of the stories of burglars where he lived and how after  
nightfall he shot first then asked questions whenever he heard  
noises in his garden.
Report in the Times of South Africa
That weekend he put me on a plane to Durban where I stayed  
at Umhlanga Rocks in a splendid hotel. The plane ride was  
memorable  as  in  first  class  I  was  served  a  freshly  cooked  
breakfast with bacon, eggs, sausage, toast and a pot of coffee. I  
151
John Francis Kinsella
spent Saturday walking on the beach and come Sunday I was  
severely sunburned.
I  took  the  plane  from  Johannesburg  to  New  Zealand  via  
Mauritius, Perth and Sydney, and on arrival in Auckland, I  
could no longer put my shoes on and could barely walk. It was  
cold and damp when I arrived in Rotorua, there in the company  
dispensary,  I  told  the  nurse  to  her  amazement  I’d  gotten  
sunburn in South Africa, 6,000 miles away.
New Zealand seemed a very quite and empty place where  
nothing very much happened. It was very green and when I  
woke up the first morning in Rotorua the view from the hotel  
window confirmed that, a pleasant green landscape under a  
pale blue sky, not unlike those back in England on an early  
summer’s morning.
I opened the window to get a better look outside. The shock  
was instantaneous, a vile stink of sulphur hit me and I quickly  
slammed the window shut. Rotorua was famous for geothermal  
activity with its hot mud pools belching out its sulfurous odors  
day and night. It was difficult to eat my breakfast, but I was  
told I would soon get used to the smell. After a week in the  
town I did not get used to the smell and was pleased to leave  
for Wellington to visit a potential customer before continuing  
my journey.
The trip south confirmed my impression, New Zealand was a  
very quiet green place, it was also very strange. We passed a  
string of active volcanoes on our way south driving through  
national parks. Then, after returning to Auckland we spent the  
152A Traveller’s Tales
weekend  driving  north  along  the  isthmus.   The  suburbs  of  
Auckland with their staid old English seaside towns, wooden  
houses and neatly trimmed lawns, gradually gave way to a very  
different  landscape.  The  climate  visibly  changing  to  semi-
tropical as we made our way towards Cape Reinga, driving  
through  luxuriant  forests  of  giant  tree  ferns  that  looked  as  
though they had come directly from the Jurassic Period.
I then left for Sydney where I visited the sights, including the  
Opera House which was in its final stages of completion after  
more  than  a  decade  of  controversy  and  drama.  I  flew  to  
Melbourne where I hired a car to visit a customer at Maryvale  
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  kilometres  to  the  east.  It  was  
summer, hot and dry, as I drove through the giant eucalyptus  
forests of Victoria’s national parks, the home of the Koala bear.
Back in Melbourne I found the city unexciting with pubs  
closing at ten in the evening when raucous drinkers lined up  
their pints on the bar before the shutter came down and where  
restaurants did not serve alcohol. Quality restaurants were few  
and  far  between  and  Melbourne  still  had  an  old  fashioned  
colonial  air  about  it  compared  to  the  cosmopolitan  city  I  
rediscovered twenty years later.
My business concluded, I flew back to Sydney and organised  
my flight home via Tahiti, leaving Australia on my birthday,  
February  4,  1972,  and  flying  east  stopping  in  Fidji,  then  
crossing  the  international  date  and  arriving  in  Papeete,  
February 3, so the next day it was my birthday again. 
153John Francis Kinsella
I stayed several days exploring the fabled island where many  
of the beaches were covered with natural debris, coconuts, tree  
trunks and general flotsam. The views were spectacular and I  
took a trip in a glass bottomed boat, not exactly dressed for the  
occasion with my thick winter trousers, a long sleeved shirt and  
city shoes. I must have looked strange to the stylish family of  
French tourists who shared the same boat with me.
154A Traveller’s Tales
20
 year later I found myself in New Zealand again, this time  
travelling via the eastern route where I discovered Kuala  
Lumpur and Singapore. This time I continued to Easter Island  
on a Lan Chile flight, strangely manned by a Lufthansa crew.  
The island, a windswept rock that lay in the middle of the  
Pacific Ocean,  was one of the most isolated places I’d ever  
visited, its airport a desolate air strip without any structures  
whatsoever,  not  even  the  slightest  semblance  of  a  control  
tower.A
The Moai on Easter Island
The flight was welcomed by a solitary truck and those of us  
who descended joined a jeep that appeared from nowhere for a  
155
John Francis Kinsella
trip around the island. Isla de Pascua, a Chilean territory, was  
in effect a refuelling stop on the long transpacific flight from  
New Zealand to Santiago de Chile, a few hours stopover during  
which passengers could visit the strange Moai, the hundreds of  
mysterious giant statues built by a forgotten people. I saw no  
other  vehicle,  only  riders  who  galloped  by  on  their  small  
ponies.
I arrived in Santiago late that afternoon. The city lay in a  
valley flanked by the Cordillera de la Costa to the west and the  
Andes to the east. The Lan Chile Douglas skimmed so low  
over  the  Cordilla  that  I  was  sure  we  were  about  to  crash,  
fortunately the land dropped away at the last moment and I saw  
the city far below the mountains.
I  took  a  taxi  to  what  had  been  luxurious  Carrera  Hotel  
overlooking  the  presidential  palace  where  Salvador  Allende  
was still governing his crisis stricken country. The following  
year he was killed when his palace was attacked by tanks in a  
coup led by Augusto Pinochet. The hotel had been taken over  
by the Allende government that had nationalised a large part of  
the country’s economy as part of his socialist reforms. The  
carpet on the steps leading up from the square to the hotel  
lobby was full of large holes and the hotel was in a sad state of  
disrepair.
I was informed that there were few restaurants open as food  
was in short supply and taxis were few and far between as  
petrol was also in short supply. 
156A Traveller’s Tales
The next morning I was awoken by the sound of military  
music and from my hotel window I watched as a troop of  
soldiers goose-stepped out of the palace below into the square  
where the flag was raised. It was a curious sight, the soldiers  
wearing jackboots and German style Stahlhelm helmets.
Santiago de Chile - Bernardo O’Higgins – a national hero
Walking  through  the  city  I  was  astonished  to  discover  a  
statute to Bernardo O’Higgins a national hero who fought the  
Spanish during the Chilean War of Independence. His was an  
almost incredible tale, he was born in Chillán in 1778, the  
illegitimate  son  of  Ambrosio  O’Higgins,  born  in  Ballynary,  
County Sligo, Ireland, the son of Charles and Margaret, tenant  
farmers. In 1751, Ambrosio arrived at Cádiz, and in 1756, he  
emigrated  to  South  America.  He  joined  the  army  and  
eventually became Captain General and Governor of Chile. In  
157
John Francis Kinsella
1777, Isabel Riquelme at the age of sixteen gave birth to a son,  
Bernardo, out of wedlock, the father was Ambrosio who was  
fifty seven.
Bernardo O’Higgins, who never met his father, studied in  
London, then returned to Chile where he should have lived the  
life of a gentleman on the estate he had inherited from his  
father. However, this was not to be, his life became a series of  
turbulent  adventures,  fighting  in  the  Chilean  War  of  
Independence, exiled to Argentina, fighting with Bolivar for  
the independence of Bolivia, before finally returning to Chile  
where he died in 1842.
As  for  myself,  I  continued  to  Buenos  Aires  in  Argentina  
where I discovered a European city, a dynamic modern city that  
reminded me of Milan. My object a visit to Cellulose Argentina  
in Santa Fe on the Parana River about 450 kilometres to the  
north of the capital where I talked about their future investment  
programme.
I  continued  my  journey  via  Montevideo  to  Sao  Paulo  in  
Brazil where I discovered another astonishing city. On arrival  
high up in my hotel I collapsed onto the bed exhausted by my  
travels leaving the window opened to air the room. I awoke to  
the  noise  from  the  streets  far  below  and  looking  from  the  
window saw the street jammed with traffic and filled with what  
appeared  to  be  the  early  evening  crowd  going  about  their  
business. I checked my watch it was two in the morning, I had  
slept more than six hours.
158A Traveller’s Tales
In Sao Paulo I met with an expatriate Englishman who had  
been living in the country for many years and was with a large  
pulp and paper company. He invited me to his club for lunch to  
talk business. The next day we would visit a plant outside of  
the city leaving me with the rest of the day to explore. He  
warned me it was a dangerous place and not to walk out alone  
in the evening.
I was surprised to discover that many Japanese had emigrated  
to live  in Brazil  and many of them  were  small  farmers or  
drivers of the green V olkswagen cabs. Apart from that fact the  
population was very mixed racially, it was difficult to define  
their origins, but I was told that in spite of that racism existed  
on a scale that went from Criolla to Black.
We visited one of their plants that lay outside of the huge city  
where the landscape quickly gave way from concrete to red  
laterite with the hills and roadsides furrowed by the endless  
streams of tropical rains that ran off the deforested land. 
I toyed with the idea of visiting Rio,  but was advised against  
it. I was informed it was dangerous for a gawking foreigner  
like myself and from what I had seen in Sao Paulo, I believed  
my host. 
I called it a day and booked my onward flight, destination the  
USA, which would change my life for years to come. 
159John Francis Kinsella
21 
y problems started in Miami, where I arrived February  
13,  a  Sunday  morning,  via  Quito  and  Panama.  The  
airport was quiet and all foreign exchange bureaus were closed.  
I did not have a single US dollar and the taxis refused to accept  
any other currency. After near on an hour of searching I found a  
friendly sales assistant in one of the few airport stores open on  
Sundays, who kindly gave me a couple of dollars to pay a taxi  
to a nearby motel. M
That afternoon still penniless I headed for Miami Beach on  
foot, a perilous journey in the land of the automobile. Along  
the way I passed through a rundown neighbourhood where I  
was  confronted  by  a  group  of  black  youths,  one  of  them  
looking at me wildly asked,  ‘What you doing here snowball.’ I  
smiled nervously and pressed on, recalling my experience in  
the Americana in London more than a decade earlier.
I was glad to get back to the airport and on Monday morning  
checked onto a flight to Boston. On arrival I had a connecting  
flight to Portland and after checking in my bags, I enquired  
how long it would take from Portland to Biddeford. No one at  
the desk had ever heard of Biddeford. Finally, as I was about to  
board the aircraft, I attempted one last enquiry. 
The ground hostess looked at me aghast, ‘Biddeford near  
Portland…Maine?’
160A Traveller’s Tales
‘Yes.’
‘Sir, this flight is to Portland in Oregon!’
The passengers on the flight must have cursed me as it took  
another twenty minutes to retrieve my baggage. I then headed  
back to the ticketing desk and changed my flight to Portland,  
Maine, half an hour’s flight from Boston compared to the five  
hour transcontinental flight to Portland in Oregon.
I called Ed Bryand, president of Metal-Tech Inc, who told me  
to wait, he would pick me up in his own plane. A couple of  
hours later the public announcement system informed me to go  
to a special gate where Ed was waiting for me. I felt like  
visiting royalty being picked up in a private plane.
Ed  Bryand  began  his  engineering  career  by  designing  jet  
engine components and formed his own company, Metal-Tech,  
which was renamed Honeycomb Systems, and became a multi-
national business, in no small way thanks to myself, which he  
later sold to a German engineering group.
That visit to the small town of Biddeford was another turning  
point. It had all started out with a simple letter in the post a  
couple of months earlier back in Skelmersdale. Ed Bryand, the  
founder of Metal-Tech Inc. had written to us to ask if we could  
manufacture a special kind of drying process. I replied yes  
without knowing exactly what the process was and proposed  
meeting him in the US in February.
Ed’s  story  was  a  typical  American  success  story  after  he  
patented a jet engine seal and went on to use the technology in  
161John Francis Kinsella
a  special  drying  process,  building  a  successful  hi-tech  
metallurgical engineering business in Maine in the north east of  
the USA. Ed was visible impressed when I arrived from my  
around the world trip and my success as a young engineering  
manager.
Ed’s  plant  was  in  Biddeford,  not  far  from  the  Canadian  
border, where quite a few people spoke French. Ed described  
his dryer to me, it was destined for a project shrouded in great  
secrecy for a company manufacturing a new kind of paper and  
did not want to lose their market lead in non-woven papers.
The project was to be located at Chirnside in Scotland, about  
fifty kilometres south east of Edinburgh, where the C.H.Dexter  
Corporation was building a new mill and Ed Bryand had signed  
the contract to supply a key part of the process to produce non-
woven teabag paper.
On returning home we submitted an offer to build Metal-
Tech’s system and soon after we received the order. Less than a  
year later, not long after the plant was delivered to Scotland,  
and the mill inaugurated by Queen Elizabeth II of England, Ed  
hired me to launch his business in Europe with a new company  
we called Honeycomb Systems, based in the east of France,  
near to Basle in Switzerland.
162A Traveller’s Tales
22
ne  fine  day  a  wonderful  opportunity  presented  itself . 
After my success in Vancouver and with Metal-Tech, I  
could do no wrong. Overnight I was a golden boy and was free  
to  do as I liked. So when Bob Wright’s secretary announced  
there was a ticket going for Lufthansa’s inaugural Boeing 747  
flight to Hong Kong was up for grabs, I grabbed it.O
It was a round trip with an open return. On the pretext that I  
could  hop over to Taiwan, where there was a new pulp mill  
project in the planning, I  took off  for Hong Kong, which in  
those days was still a British colony and Mao Zedong ruled  
China as it struggled to recover from the woes of the Cultural  
Revolution.
I  flew  from  Manchester  to  Frankfurt  where  I  joined  
Lufthansa’s  newly  acquired  Boeing  747,  destination  Hong  
Kong. Three hours later over Istanbul the captain announced he  
was turning back to Frankfurt, a minor technical problem. A  
good part of the day was gone before we flew past Istanbul for 
the second  time. The 747, the world’s largest airliner at that  
time, had only just been put into service by Lufthansa,  and they  
were  taking no chances. 
Our first stop was Tehran, then New Dehli, Bangkok and  
finally Hong Kong where we landed the next day after a hair  
raising approach to Kai Tak Airport over the roofs of the grime  
streaked tenements and warehouses that surrounded it.
163John Francis Kinsella
It was my first meeting with China and the kaleidoscope of  
smells, sounds and colours that I discovered was to stay with  
me for the rest of my life. It was still almost thirty years before  
Britain’s retrocession of their colony, which at the end of 1971  
was being flooded by a wave of refugees fleeing the excesses  
Mao’s disastrous attempt to consolidate his power.
At that time Japan was Asia’s star and Deng Xiaoping was  
still in the wings awaiting his moment when he would launch  
China onto the path that would would transform it into the  
second most powerful nation on Earth . In the meantime it was  
a poor peasant society led by an aging tyrant.
The stopover in Bangkok was a reminder of the War that was  
raging in nearby Vietnam, making Bangkok and Hong Kong,  
the Rest and Recreation playgrounds for American GIs fighting  
that drawn out war against Communism.
Today looking back  more than  half a century  later,  there is  
little doubt America won the war or the wars. Why, because  
any normal human being aspires to security, home, food and  
comfort,  which  Communism  did  not  deliver.  The  grinding  
misery of Mao’s China, Breznev’s gulag, the DDR’s shoddy  
goods and the oppression of free expression exemplified by  
Ceaucescu’s Romania, doomed Communism  to failure. Secret  
police plus empty stomachs was a sure path to social collapse.
Modern China has made huge progress in every  domain, even  
freedom of expression, though criticism of the state’s apparatus  
is still taboo  and Xi Jinping’s turn of the screw now threatens  
the nation’s hard earned gains.
164A Traveller’s Tales
In 1971, Hong Kong pointed the way forward, though it was  
anything but a democratic society. London decided everything  
and the industrialisation of the colony was underway with an 
influx of  more  cheap labour  from  the Mainland fle eing the 
excesses of Mao’s Cultural Revolution .
Hong Kong 1972
I was told by our office in Hong Hong that a visa to Taiwan  
would require more time than I had, so I contented myself to  
exploring Hong Kong, I would have to wait another decade to  
discover Taiwan. In the meantime, I fell in love with the Star  
Ferry  whilst  doing  my  best  to  avoid  the  colony’s  lurid  
attractions, which flourished with the presence of America’s  
GI’s on leave from that grim war in Vietnam.
165
John Francis Kinsella
Hong Kong was an epiphany in the same way as Rimini, it  
cracked open a door, giving me a glimpse into South, Southeast  
and East Asia, but first was the USA, but all that is another  
story which I will relate in Part II.
166ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book like all my other books could not have been written  
without the data and information published on the Internet and  
in the world press collected over a period of years, starting in  
1988, when I wrote Borneo Pulp, and my career as a raconteur  
of tales was launched on on its doubtful trajectory.
Over the years I have trawled countless British, Irish, US,  
Russian,  French,  Spanish,  Chinese,  Israeli,  Colombian  
newspapers, news blogs and specialist Internet sites, and books  
(authors’ cited). And of course Wikipedia.
During this period I have collected information during my  
visits to the USA, China, Hong Kong, Macau, Indonesia, India,  
Dubai, Thailand, Cambodia, Libya, Egypt, Kenya, Tanzania,  
Senegal,  Mali,  Morocco,  Argentina,  Chile,  Brazil,  Mexico,  
Colombia,  Panama,  Costa  Rica,  Brazil,  Guatemala,  Belize,  
Honduras, the Philippines, the UK, Ireland, Germany, Belgium,  
France, Spain and Italy. To this I have added my experience in  
other parts of the world, notably Australia, New Zealand, South  
Africa, Kenya, Tanzania, Mali, Senegal, Malaysia, Singapore,  
Brunei, Taiwan, Japan, Burma, Switzerland, Algeria, Russia,  
Scandinavia,  the  Baltic  Countries,  Poland,  Hungary,  the  
countries  of  ex-Yugoslavia,  Greece,  Turkey,  Russia,  
Turkmenistan,  Jordan,  Syria,  Israel,  Egypt,  the  Caribbean,  
Central and South America.I  present  my  thanks  and  excuses  to  all  the  willing  and  
unwilling contributors to the information included in this book,  
I am not the first to tread in the footsteps of Jack London, using  
the information supplied to us from those who convey it. I have  
tried to verify all the facts, but this is an impossible task. In my  
humble opinion most data reflects real events and the opinions  
of the vast majority of persons affected, directly or indirectly,  
by the multiple events and crises that constitute our collective  
existence.
Then there are the many books I scoured including Anthony  
Cronin’s book ‘ No Laughing Matter: The life and times of  
Flann O’Brien’. 
With my very sincere thanks to all contributors, direct and  
indirect, knowing and unknowing, willing and unwilling.
John Francis Kinsella
Paris, July 2024Other books by John Francis Kinsella
Fiction
Borneo  Pulp
Offshore  Islands
The Legacy  of Solomon
The Plan
The Prism  2049
The Lost Forest
Death  of a Financier
The Turning  Point  2007 -2008
The Collection
A Redhead  at the Pushkin
The Last Ancestor
Cornucopiaavailable free  at  www .obooko .comA Weekend in Brussels
The Cargo Club
100 Seconds to Midnight
The Gilgamesh Project 
Book I The Codex
Book II La Isla Bonita
Book III La Villa Contessa
Book I V Ibiza
Book V Cuba
Chinese Poker
The Edge of Tomorrow
Over the Precipice
The BezzleAUDIOBOOK
Book I The Codex and Book II La Isla Bonita are now  
available in Audiobook form, narrated by the author. They  
can be found at many well-known distributors.
Non-fiction
An Introduction to Early Twentieth Century Chinese  
Literature
Translations
Le Point de Non Retour
The Sorrow of Europe
The Temple of Solomon
Jean Sibelius A biography
Understanding Architecture
L’île de l’ouestYoutube Audiocast
Listen to The Codex Audiocast on Youtube
In the works
‘HA VING GOOD TIMES ’
the autobiography of 
Sean Proinsias Cinnsealaigh
as told to 
Dee O’Connelly