
 
1. BASIC TERMS USED IN STUDY OF FOOD AND NUTRITION:  The following terms and concepts are widely used in the understanding  nutrition - 
Health : is defined by the World Health Organization as the “State of complete physical, 
social and mental well -being and not merely the absence of any disease and infirmity” . The 
essential requirements  of health include the following:  
• Optimal growth and developme nt  
• Maintenance of structural integrity and functional capacity of the body  
• Ability to withstand the process of ageing with minimal loss of ability  
• Ability to fight  diseases as shown by resisting infections,  
• Preventing the onset of degenerative diseases   
• Resisting the effect of environmental pollutants and toxins  
Foods: Products derived from plants or animals that can be taken into the body to yield 
energy and nutrients for the maintenance of life and the growth and repair of tissues.  
Nutrition: Nutrition  is derived from the latin word ‘nutrire ’ meaning feed, nourish and is a 
science of foods, nutrients and other  substances they contain and their actions within the body 
as well as social, economic, cultural and psychological associations of food and eating . 
Nutrients : Chemical substances obtained from food and used in the body to provide energy, 
structural materials, and regulating agents to support growth, maintenance, and repair of the 
body’s tissues.  
Nutrient requirements :Defined as the minimum amount of  the absorbed nutrient necessary 
for normal physiological functioning of the body.  
Nutritional status:  The health status of an individual as affected by the intake and level of 
nutrients  and the ability of those levels to maintain normal metabolism.  
Malnutrition:  means an undesirable kind of nutrition leading to ill -health. It results from a 
lack,excess or imbalance of nutrients in the diet. It includes under nutrition and 
overnutrition.Undernutr ition is a state of an insufficien t supply of essential nutrients 
andovernutrition refers to an excessive intake of one or more nutrients . 
Phytochemicals:  Non nutrient compounds found in plant derived foods that have biological 
activity in the body. Foods with such phytochemicals providing benefits to health are calle d 
functional foods.  Balanced diet:  A diet which contains different types of foods in quantities enough to meet 
the need for nutrients as well as a small provision to meet nutrients durin g a short duration of 
starvation.The daily diet must provide all essential nu trients in the required amountswhich 
vary with age, gender, physiological status and phy sical activity. A typical Indian balanced 
diet should provide 60- 70% of energy from carbohy drates, 10- 12% from protein and 20- 25% 
of energy from fat.  The features of a balanced diet are-  
• Meets nutritional requirements  
• Develops maximum cognitive ability  
• Prevents degenerative diseases  
• Improves longevity  
• Improves immunity  
• Helps in coping up stress  
2. NUTRIENTS   
Broadly the nutrients are classified based on the amount required as macronutrients and 
micronutrients. C arbohydrate, fat, and protein  are called macronutrients because the body 
requires them in re latively large amounts (many gram s daily). I n contrast, vitamins a nd 
minerals are micronutrients, required only in small amounts (milligrams or micrograms 
daily).  
Carbohydrates  
Carbohydrates are either simple or complex, and  are major sources of energy . They provide 
energy of 4 Kc al/g. The simple ca rbohydrates, glucose and fructose, are found in fruits, 
vegetab les and honey, sucrose in sugar and lactose in milk, while the complex 
polysacch arides are starches in cereals, millets, pulses and root vegetables and glycogen in 
animal foods. The other compl ex carbohydrates which are resistant to digestion i n the human 
digestive tract are cellulose in vegetables and whole grains, and gums and pectins in 
vegetables, fruits and cereals, which are called as  the dietary fibre.  
 
Protein  Proteins are complex molecules composed of different amino acids. Certain amino aci ds 
which are termed “essential” have to be obtained from proteins in the diet since they are not 
synthesized in the  human body. Other nonessential amino acids can be synthesized in the 
body to build proteins. Proteins perform a wide range of functions and also provide energy (4 Kcal/g). Protein requirements vary with age, physiological status and stress and more protein 
is required during growth, pregnancy, lactation, infection and illnes s. 
Animal foods like milk, meat, fish and eggs and plant foods such as pulses and legume s are 
rich sources of proteins. Animal proteins are of high quality as they provide a ll the essential 
amino acids in right proportions, while plant or vegetable prote ins are not of the same quality 
because of their low content of some of the essential  amino acids. However, a right 
combination of cereals, millets and pulses provides  most of the amino acids. 
Fat 
Fats are a concentrated source of energy providi ng 9 Kcal/g, and are made up of fatty acids in 
different proportions. Dietary fats are de rived from two sources viz. the invisible fat present 
in plant and animal foods; and the  visible or added fats and oils (cooking oil). Fats serve as a 
vehicle for fat -soluble vit amins like vitamins A, D, E and K. It is necessary to have adequate 
and good quality fat in the diet for meeting the requirements of essenti al fatty acids .  
Diets should include adequate amounts of fat particul arly in the case of infants and children, 
to provide concentrated energy since their energy needs more compared to adults . Adults 
need to be cautioned to restrict intake of saturated fat (butter, ghee and hydrogenated f ats) 
and cholesterol (red meat, eggs, organ meat). Excess of these substances could l ead to 
obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer.  
Vitamins and Minerals  
Vitamins are chemical compounds required by the body in small amounts. They must be present in the diet as they cannot be synthe sized in the body. Vitamins are essential for  
numerous body processes and for mainte nance of the structure of skin, bone, nerves, eye, 
brain, blood and mucous membrane. They are either water soluble or fat -soluble. Vitamins A, 
D, E and K are fat -soluble, while vitamin C, and the B -complex v itamins su ch as thiamine 
(B1 ),  riboflavin (B 2 ), nia cin (B3), pyridoxine (B6), folic acid  (B9) and 
cyanocobalamin(B 12 ) are watersoluble. Fat -solubl e vitamins can be stored in the body while 
water -soluble vitamins are not and get easily excreted in urine.  Minerals  are inorganic elements found in body fluids and tissues. The impor tant macro 
minerals are sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium a nd sulphur, while zinc, 
copper, selenium, molybdenum, fluorine, cobalt, chromium  and iodine are micro minerals. 
They are required for maintenance and integrity of skin, hair, nails, blood and soft tissues. 
They also govern nerve cell transmissio n, acid/base and fluid balance, enzyme and hormone 
activity as well as the blood - clotting processes.  
Water –Water  is a crucial element that provides the environment in which nearly all the 
body’s activities are conducted.  Several foods and large proportion of human body is made 
up of water. It participa tes in many metabolic reactions and supplies the medium for 
transporting vital materials to cells and carrying waste products away from them. 
3. FOOD GROUPS  
The balanced diet as defined earlier can be achieved through a proper blend of foods from the 
basic five food groups  based on the nutrient content and biological group the plant belongs 
to.The five food groups are as follows - 
Cereal grains  and products - Include foods like r ice, wheat, ragi, bajra, maize, jo war, barley, 
rice flakes, wheat flour oats etc. The main nutrients provided are Energy, protein, Invisible 
fat, Vitamin – B 1, Vitamin – B 2, Folic Acid, Iron and Fibre.  
Pulses and Legumes - Include foods  like bengal gram, black gram, green g ram, red gram, 
lentil (whole as well as dhals) cowpea, peas, rajmah, soyabeans.  The main nutrients provided 
are Energy, Protein, Invisible fat, Vitamin –  B1, Vitamin – B2, Folic Acid, Calcium, Iron and 
Fibre.  
Milk and meat products -Include foods such as milk, curd, skimmed milk, cheese, 
paneer& chicken, liver, fish, egg, meat . The mai n nutrients provided are Prote in, Fat, Vitamin 
B2, B12, Calcium  and phosphorus .  
Fruits & Vegetables  – Fruits include Mango, Guava, Tomato Ripe, Papaya, Orange, Sweet 
Lime, Watermelon etc; Vegetables include greens such as Amaranth, Spinach, Drumstick 
leaves, Coriander leaves, Mustard leaves, fenugreek leaves and other vegetables such as  
Carrots, Brinjal, Ladies fingers, Capsicum, Beans, Onion, Drumstick, Cauliflower etc . The 
main nutrients provided are Vitamin C, Fibre, Invisible Fats, Carotenoids, Vita min – B2, 
Folic A cid, Calcium, Iron, Fibre and a variety  of phytochemicals.  Fats and sugars - Butter, ghee, hydrogenated oils, cooking oils like groundnut, mustard, 
coconut, sunflower, palmoleinetc are foods under fats and s ugar, j aggery under s ugars. The 
major nutrient sprovided are e nergy and different types of f atty acids .Fats are a concentrated 
source of energy. Some amount of fat is needed in daily diet because they supply essential 
fatty acids. Besides this, some vitamins like A, D, E and K are fat soluble and important for 
our body.Sugar, jaggery and honey are sweetening agents a nd provide carbohydrates to the 
body . 
The five food group system has the following uses by health care professionals: - 
• Tool for nutritional assessment and screening : Evaluat ion of dietary history of an 
individual can disclose nutrient inadequacies from any of the five food groups. This 
can help in identifying the risk of an individual developing malnutrition 
• Tool for nutritional counselling: The five food group system can be used in the 
education of an individual about proper nutrition. 
• Food labelling: The food groups can be used as a component of the food labelling.  
4. DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES  
The results of research studies in the field of nutrition are used by Scientists /Researchers to 
derive standards . These standards  explain the amounts of individual nutrients required by 
healthy individuals of all age groups for supporting health. Such standards are collectively 
called as ‘Dietary Reference Intakes’ which is an umbrella term for the following individual 
values - 
Estimated average requirements (EAR)  
The estimated nutrient requirement that is adequate in 50% of the population studi ed and is 
used to develop the recommended dietary allowances . 
Recommended dietary allowances  (RDA)  
RDA’s are estimates of nutrients to be consumed daily to ensure the requirements of all 
individuals in a given population. RDA  is adequate for 97 -98% ofthe healthy population and 
is separate for physiological groups such as infants, pre -schoolers, children, adolescents, 
pregnant women, lactating mothers, and adult men and women, taking into account their 
physical activity .RDA also includes  a margin of safety to cover variation between 
individuals, dietary traditions and practices . Adequate intakes  (AI) 
For some nutrients, there is insufficient knowledge to determine an Estimated Average 
Requirement (which is needed to set an RDA). In these cases, an AI is used  which reflects the 
average amount of a nutrient that a group of healthy people consume.  
Tolera ble upper intake levels  (UL)  
It is the maximum intake of a nutrient that is not associated with adverse side effects in most 
individuals of the healthy population.  
Overall, t hese recommendations apply to healthy people and may not be appropriate for 
people with diseases who have alte red nutrient needs . Care should be taken to consider 
country specific recommendations while deciding the nutrient requirements. 
5. RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN FOOD, NUTRITION AND HEALTH  
Diet has always played a vital role in supporting health. Good nutrition impa cts greatly on 
people’s general wellbeing. Food choices influence the health and well -being of individuals. 
Malnutrition occurs when there is imbalance in nutrients consumed and utilized. Poor 
nutrition can have an effect on energy levels, alertness, mobility, steadiness and healing . 
Nutrition imbalance can be either: General , i.e. due to excessive /deficient  amounts of food of 
any or all types, leading to obesity , protein energy malnutritionetcor Specific , i.e. 
excess /deficiency  of a single nutrient  that may arise due to faulty food habits or an underlying 
disease e.g. Vitamin C deficiency, iron deficiency anemia etc. The health consequences 
depend on the nutrient and the severity of the imbalance.  
Undernutrition is a state of  nutrient deficiency due to insufficient food intake . It usually 
affects the balance of all the nutrients in the  body. Poor diets, when combined with poor 
health can lead to serious health and nutritional pro blems such as decreased immunity , 
frequent infections , hormone changes , dimini shed fat free mass , decreased work 
efficiency, poor growth in children, increased expenses for medical care and overall decreased 
quality of life.  
Overnutrition is the opposite of undernutrition and occurs due to frequent or habitual 
consumption of nutrients by eating too much food to the level  that it becomes dangerous to 
health. Although most nutrients can be harmful in excess, the danger of overnutrition relates 
mostly to carbohydrates and fats. O besity is an ex treme form of overnutrition resulting from an accumulation of excessive amounts of body fat. Obesity increases the risk of chronic 
diseases including   type 2 diabetes, hypertension (high blood pressure), stroke, heart dise ase,   
cancer, joint problems, liver  problems, difficulty in breathing and decreased mobility . The 
health consequences of these conditions range from premature death to disabilities . 
Thus with proper food choices leading to a good nutrition can have the following benefits - 
• Promotion of  optimal grow th and development of children  
• Reduced  risk of developing chronic diseases such as cardiovascular  disease, cancer, 
diabetes, obesity, osteoporosis, iron deficiency, and dental caries (cavities). 
• Obtaining  a healthy and productive life.  
6. BMI AND NUTRITIONAL STATUS  
Body Mass Index (BMI)  formerly called the Quetelet index, is a measure for indicating 
nutritional status in adults. It is one of the measures used to assess an individual’s nutritional 
status and helps to identify malnutrition. BMI i s also recommended for use in children and 
adolescents. In children, BMI is calculated as for adults and then compared with z -scores or 
percentiles.  
It is defined as a person’s weight in kilograms divided by the square of the person’s height in 
metres (kg/m2). For example, an adult who weighs 70 kg and whose height is 1.75 m will 
have a BMI of 22.9.  
70 (kg)/1.752 (m2) = 22.9 kg/m2  
The BMI ranges are based on the effect of excessive body fat causing disease and death.  BMI 
was developed as an indicator of risk of developing diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, 
high blood pressure, osteoarthritis, some cancers and diabetes  because as BMI increasesthe 
chance of developing above mentioned diseases also increases.  
The World Health Organization has provided the following criteria for assessment of 
nutritional status based on BMI.  
BMI  (kg/m2) Nutritional status  
Below 18.5  Underweight  
18.5–24.9 Normal weight  
25.0–29.9 Pre-obesity  BMI  (kg/m2) Nutritional status  
30.0–34.9 Obesity class I  
35.0–39.9 Obesity class II  
Above 40  Obesity class III  
 
The BMI criteria is further modified for use in South Asian populations as South Asians have 
been found to be more at risk of the problems such as type 2 diabetes and heart disease  
arising due to being overweight , is provided below . 
 
 
  
Nutrition is a basi c human need and a prerequisite to a healthy life. Foods provide nutrients —
substances that s upport the growth, maintenance, and repair of the body’s tissues. A proper 
diet is essential from the very early stages of life for proper growth, development and t o 
remain active. Individual food choices influence health both positively and negatively . A 
proper balance  of foods selected over time canmake an i mportant contribution to health. 
CONCLUSION 
Foods provide nutrients that  are necessary for growth, maintenance, and repair of the body’s 
tissues. Food selection by people varies based on habit, preference, culture etc but not always 
based on the nutrition value of foods . Food choices can alter  the health of an individual both 
negatively and posi tively. Nutritional science deals with the nutritional value of foods  and 
study  of the nutrient requirements across differen t age groups and stages of life. These help in 
simplifying the process of learning proper food selection and providing recommendations to 
promote proper food habits  and health. Thus the current chapter provides the basic terms and 
their meaning in nutrition, nutrients available in foods grouped into categories, terms under 
nutrient requirements and use of BMI as an indicator of nutriti onal status.    BMI (kg/m2)Nutritional status  
<18.0Underweight  
18.0- 22.9              Normal  
23.0- 24.9 Overweight  
>25 Obesity  
 