UNIT I: INTRODUCTION: SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY  
 
INTRODUCTION TO SPORT PSYCHOLOGY  
Sport and Exercise Psychology is the study of psychological and mental factors that 
influence, and are influenced by, participation in sport, exercise and physical activity, and the 
application of this knowledge to everyday settings.  Exercise psychology and sport psychology 
involve the scientific study of the psychological factors that are associated with participation 
and performance in sport, exercise and other typ es of physical activity. Sport psychologists are 
interested in two main areas: (a) helping athletes use psychological principles to achieve 
optimal mental health and to improve performance (performance enhancement) and (b) 
understanding how participation i n sport, exercise and physical activity affects an individual's 
psychological development, health and well -being throughout the lifespan.  
APPLIED SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY  
Applied sport and exercise psychology consists of instructing athletes, coaches, teams, 
exercisers, parents, fitness professionals, groups, and other performers on the psychological 
aspects of their sport or activity. The goal of applied practice is to optimize performance and 
enjoyment through the use of psychological skills and the use of  psychometrics  and 
psychological assessment.  
Applied sport psychology is the study and application of psychological principles of 
human performance in helping athletes consistentl y perform in the upper range of their 
capabilities and more thoroughly enjoy the sport performance process. Applied sport 
psychologists are uniquely trained and specialized to engage in a broad range of activities 
including the identification, development and execution of the mental and emotional 
knowledge, skills and abilities required for excellence in athletic domains; the understanding, 
diagnosing and preventing of the psychological, cognitive, emotional, behavioral and 
psychophysiological inhibitors of  consistent, excellent performance; and the improvement of 
athletic contexts to facilitate more efficient development, consistent execution and positive 
experiences in athletes.  
WHO ARE SPORTS AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGISTS?  
Sports psychologists investigate ho w participating in sports can improve health and 
well being. They also help athletes utilize psychology to improve their sports performance and 
mental well -being.  
Sport and Exercise Psychologists are interested in how sport, exercise, and physical 
activity  can enhance performance, health, and enjoyment in certain activities. The key focus is on the development of mental skills -the ability for individuals to understand and use their 
minds to improve their performances and enjoyment.  
Sports psychologists typ ically perform a range of tasks related to sports performance 
and education. Some opt to teach at the university level, while others work directly with athletes 
to increase motivation and enhance performance. Other options include client counseling, 
scient ific research and athletic consulting.  In addition to working with professional athletes, 
sports psychologists also utilize their expertise to increase the mental well -being of non -
athletes. They may work with a range of non -professional clients, including  children and teens 
involved in athletics and injured athletes working toward returning to competition.  
Generally, there are two different types of sport psychologists: educational and clinical.  
Educational sport psychologists  emphasize the use of psychol ogical skills training 
(e.g., goal setting, imagery, energy management, self -talk) when working with clients by 
educating and instructing them on how to use these skills effectively during performance 
situations. The common goal of an educational sport psy chologist is performance enhancement 
by teaching skills to athletes on how to manage the mental factors of sports to maximize 
potential.  
Clinical sports psychologists  obtain a doctoral degree in clinical or counseling 
psychology. They meet with athletes that have mental health issues and work to provide the 
mental health solutions they need both individually and in group settings. Areas of expertise 
include mainly clin ical issues, which include but are not limited to depression, eating disorders, 
and substance abuse. They are able to prescribe medications or other forms of treatment to 
address clinical issues. A non -clinical sport psychologist might refer one of their c lients to a 
clinical psychologist if it is thought that the athlete might need additional help regarding their 
mental health.  
THREEE ORIENTATIONS OF SPORTS PSYCHOLOGISTS  
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL ORIENTATION  - An approach to the study of sport 
psychology that f ocuses on the relationship between mental activities and physiological 
processes (e.g. heart rate and muscle action potentials), and their effects on physical activity. 
Examines underlying psychophysiological processes of the brain in terms of primary caus es of 
behavior. • Example: Biofeedback to trained marksmen  
SOCIAL –PSYCHOLOGICAL ORIENTATION  • Behavior is determined by a complex 
interaction of the social environment and the personal makeup of the athlete or exerciser. • 
Example: How a leader’s style and  strategies foster group cohesion  COGNITIVE –BEHAVIORAL ORIENTATION  • Behavior is determined by both the 
environment and thoughts (cognitions). • Example: Studying differences in confidence and 
anxiety among tennis players with or without burnout  
EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Entry -level positions with a  bachelor's degree  are rare, usually taking the form of 
internships. Most positions require a ma ster's or doctorate degree in clinical, counseling or 
sports psychology as well as direct training and experience in applying psychology to sports 
and exercise. The American Board of Sport Psychology offers a professional certification for 
licensed psychol ogists who want to pursue this specialty. This board certification signifies that 
the holder has advanced training and experience in sport psychology and is especially aware of 
ethical, methodological, and research issues associated with the application of  methods to 
enhance the psychological performance of athletes. In order to pursue this certification, 
applicants must have a doctorate degree and a license to practice in at least one state.  Division 
47 of the APA suggests that sports psychologists should be licensed psychologists with 
"experience in applying psychological principles in sports settings  
  CAREER IN SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY  
Sports psychologists may also choose to specialize in a particular area. Some examples 
of major specialties within this field i nclude:  Applied sports psychology focuses on teaching 
skills to enhance athletic performance such as goal setting and imagery.  Clinical sports 
psychology  involves combining mental training strategies from sports psychology with 
psychotherapy to help clients who are experiencing mental health problems including  eating 
disorde rs and depression.  Academic sports psychologists teach at colleges and universities and 
also conduct research.  
USES OF SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY  
` Sport and Exercise Psychology can benefit anyone who wishes to improve performance 
or stay healthy in their chosen ac tivities; clients include:   
• Recreational, elite, and professional athletes (e.g. tennis players, runners, rock 
climbers)  
• Professional, representative, and club sporting teams (e.g. rugby, soccer, netball, 
basketball)  
• Performing artists (e.g. dancers, musicians, actors)  
• Coaches, umpires, and referees  
• Managers, decisions makers, and administrators in white collar roles  
• Employees and employers in any other occupations concerned with optimal 
performance  
HISTORY OF SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY  
Sports psycholo gy is a relatively young discipline in psychology. The first research labs 
devoted to the topic were opened during the 1920s and 1930s. After the first U.S. lab was 
closed during the early 1930s, research did not resume until the topic experienced a reviva l of 
interest during the 1960s.  
The birth of sport psychology in Europe happened largely in Germany. The first sport 
psychology laboratory was founded by Dr. Carl Diem in Berlin, in the early 1920s. The early 
years of sport psychology were also highlighted  by the formation of the Deutsche Hochschule 
für Leibesübungen (College of Physical Education) in Berlin Germany by Robert Werner 
Schulte in 1920. The lab measured physical abilities and aptitude in sport, and in 1921, Schulte 
published  Body and Mind in Sp ort. In Russia, sport psychology experiments began as early as 
1925 at institutes of physical culture in Moscow and Leningrad, and formal sport psychology 
departments were formed around 1930.  In North America, early years of sport psychology included isol ated studies of motor 
behavior, social facilitation, and habit formation. During the 1890s, E. W. Scripture conducted 
a range of behavioral experiments, including measuring the reaction time of runners, thought 
time in school children, and the accuracy of an orchestra conductor's baton. Despite Scripture's 
previous experiments, the first recognized sport psychology study was carried out by an 
American psychologist Norman Triplett, in 1898. he work of  Norman Triplett  demonstrated 
that bicyclists were more likely to cycle faster with a pacemaker or a competitor, which has 
been foundational in the literature of social psychol ogy and social facilitation.  
Coleman Griffith: "America's first sport psychologist"  
Coleman Griffith  worked as an American professor of educational psychology at 
the University of Illinois  where he first performed comprehensive research and applied sport 
psychology. He performed causal studies on visio n and attention of basketball and soccer 
players, and was interested in their reaction times, muscular tension and relaxation, and mental 
awareness. [12] Griffith began his wor k in 1925 studying the psychology of sport at the 
University of Illinois funded by the Research in Athletics Laboratory. Until the laboratory's 
closing in 1932, he conducted research and practiced sport psychology in the field. The 
laboratory was used for the study of sport psychology; where different factors that influence 
athletic performance and the physiological and psychological requirements of sport 
competitions were investigated. He then transmitted his findings to coaches, and helped 
advance the kno wledge of psychology and physiology on sports performance. Griffith also 
published two major works during this time: The Psychology of Coaching (1926) and The 
Psychology of Athletics (1928). Coleman Griffith was also the first person to describe the job 
of sport psychologists and talk about the main tasks that they should be capable of carrying 
out. He mentioned this in his work "Psychology and its relation to athletic competition", which 
was published in 1925.  
In 1938, Griffith returned to the sporting wo rld to serve as a sport psychologist 
consultant for the  Chicago Cubs . Hired by  Philip Wrigley  for $1,500, Griffith examined a 
range of factors such as: ability, personality, leadership, skill learning, and social psychological 
factors related to performance.  
Coleman Griffith made numerous contributions to the field of sport psychology, but 
most notabl e was his belief that field studies (such as athlete and coach interviews) could 
provide a more thorough understanding of how psychological principles play out in 
competitive situations. Griffith devoted himself to rigorous research, and also published for  
both applied and academic audiences, noting that the applicability of sport psychology research was equally important with the generation of knowledge. Finally, Griffith recognized that sport 
psychology promoted performance enhancement and personal growth . 
In 1923, Griffith developed and taught the first sport psychology university courses 
("Psychology and Athletics") at the University of Illinois, and he came to be known as "The 
Father of Sport Psychology" in the United States, as a result of his pioneeri ng achievements in 
that area. However, he is also known as "The prophet without disciples", since none of his 
students continued with sport psychology, and his work started to receive attention only from 
the 1960s.  
Renewed growth and emergence as a discipl ine 
Given the relatively free travel of information amongst European practitioners, sport 
psychology flourished first in Europe, where in 1965, the First World Congress of Sport 
Psychology met in Rome, Italy. This meeting, attended by some 450 professional s primarily 
from Europe, Australia, and the Americas, gave rise to the International Society of Sport 
Psychology (ISSP). The ISSP become a prominent sport psychology organization after the 
Third World Congress of Sport Psychology in 1973. Additionally, the  European Federation of 
Sport Psychology  was founded in 1968.  
In Nor th America, support for sport psychology grew out of physical education. 
The North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity  (NASPSPA) 
grew from being an interest group to a full -fledged organization, whose mission included 
promoting  the research and teaching of motor behavior and the psychology of sport and 
exercise. In Canada, the  Canadian Society for Psychomotor Learning and Sport 
Psychology  (SCAPPS) was founded in 1977 to promote the study and exchange of ideas in the 
fields of motor behavior and sport  psychology.  
In 1979, Rainer Martens published an article entitled  "About Smocks and Jocks", in 
which he contended that it was difficult to apply specific laboratory research to sporting 
situations.  
The first journal  The Journal of Sport Psychology  came ou t in 1979; and in 1985, 
several applied sport psychology practitioners, headed by John Silva, believed an organization 
was needed to focus on professional issues in sport psychology, and therefore formed the 
Association for the Advancement of Applied Sport  Psychology (AAASP). This was done in 
response to NASPSPA voting not to address applied issues and to keep their focus on research.  
In 2007, AAASP dropped "Advancement" from its name to become the Association for 
Applied Sport Psychology (AASP), as it is c urrently known.  Following its stated goal of promoting the science and practice of applied sport 
psychology, AAASP quickly worked to develop uniform standards of practice, highlighted by 
the development of an ethical code for its members in the 1990s. The development of the 
AAASP Certified Consultant (CC -AAASP) program helped bring standardization to the 
training required to practice applied sport psychology. Moreover, in 2018 AASP updated its 
certification program and launched the Certified Mental Performa nce Consultant (CMPC). 
AASP aims to provide leadership for the development of theory, research and applied practice 
in sport, exercise, and health psychology. Also during this same time period, over 500 members 
of the  American Psychological Association  (APA) signed a petition to create Division 47 in 
1986, which is focused on Exercise and Sport Psychology.  
Sport Psychology started to beco me visible at the Olympic games in 1984, when the 
Olympic teams began to hire sport psychologists for their athletes, and in 1985, when the U.S. 
team employed their first permanent sport psychologist. For the Summer Olympics in 1996, 
the U.S. already had o ver 20 sport psychologists working with their athletes.  
More recently, the role of sport psychologist has been called on to meet the increasing 
demand for anger management for athletes. Increasingly, Sport Psychologists have needed to 
address this topic an d provide strategies and interventions for overcoming excessive anger and 
aggression in athletes, and techniques for athletes to manage emotions. A comprehensive anger 
management program for athletes was developed by Dr. Mitch Abrams, a licensed sport 
psychologist who authored "Anger Management in Sport.  
The International Society of Sport Psychology (ISSP) was established in1965 and by 
the 1970s, sports psychology had been introduced to university course offerings throughout 
North America.  By the 1980s, sports psychology became the subject of a more rigorous 
scientific focus as researchers began to explore how psychology could be used to improve 
athletic performance, as well as how exercise could be utilized to improve mental well -being 
and lower s tress levels.  
PERSONALITY AND SPORT  
Personality itself can influence many aspects of sport performance and behaviour, some 
of which may well be out of the athlete’s cognitive control. It is important to understand 
personality if dealing with athletes to pr omote the best coping strategies and goals to assist in 
improving their performance.  Personality is the unique pattern of behaviour and characteristics 
a person/athlete displays. Some psychologists believe success or failure on the sports pitch is 
determin ed by personality. Personality is the ‘psychological characteristics that make a person 
unique and account for regular patterns of behaviour’.  Hollander (1971) provided a model to show how personality is structured. The model 
has three layers:  
1. The psych ological core is innermost and this reflects the fairly permanent traits that an 
individual has. It includes their beliefs, values, attitudes and self -concept.  
2. These traits determine how a person behaves and their typical responses. For example if they  
are they are shy and timid then they will act like this in most situations.  
3. The outer layer is the role related behaviours. This is how we act in particular situations.  
DEFINING PERSONALITY  
Personality is difficult to define due to its complex nature;  however one definition in 
the literature is ‘the characterisation of individual differences’. The fact that everyone is 
different is extremely important when it comes to sport and coaching.   It is considered that 
personality relates to the specific traits  a person displays. A trait is a characteristic, which can 
be related to a person, for example ‘laziness’.   
VIEWPOINTS OF PERSONALITY  
PSYCHODYNAMIC APPROACH  
 The psychoanalytic per spective  of personality emphasizes the importance of early 
childhood experiences and the  unconscious mind . This perspective on personality was created 
by psychiatrist  Sigmund Freud  who believed that things hidden in the unconscious could be 
revealed in a number of different ways, including through dreams, free association, and slips 
of the tong ue. Neo-Freudian theorists , including Erik Erikson, Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, 
and Karen Horney , belie ved in the importance of the unconscious but disagreed with other 
aspects of Freud's theories.  
Below are the most prominent psychoanalytic perspective theorists:  
Sigmund  Freud : Stressed the importance of early childhood events, the influence of the 
unconscious, and sexual instincts in the development and formation of personality.  
Erik Er ikson : Emphasized the social elements of personality development,  the identity crisis , 
and how personality is shaped over the course of the entire lifespan.2  
Carl Jung : Focused on concepts such as the  collective unconscious , archetypes , and 
psychological types.  
Alfred Adler : Believed the core motive behind personality involves striving for superiority, or 
the desire to overcome challenges and move closer toward self -realization. This desire to 
achieve superiority stems from underlying feelings of inferiority that Adler believed were 
universal.  Karen Horney : Focused on the need to overcome basic anxiety, the sense of being isolated and 
alone in the world. She emphasized the societal and cultural factors that also play a role in 
personality, including the importance of the parent -child relationship.  
TRAIT APPROACH  
The trait perspective of personality is centered on identifying, describing, and 
measuring the specific traits that make up  human personality . By understanding these traits, 
researchers believe they can better comprehend the differences between individuals.  
Below are the most important trait perspective theorists:  
Hans Eysenck : Suggested that there are three dimensions of personality: 1) extraversion -
introversion, 2) emotional stability -neuroticism, and 3) psychoticism.  
Raymond Cattell : Identified 16 personality traits that he believed could be utilized to 
understand and measure individual differences in personality.  
Robert McCrae and Paul Costa:  Introduced the  big five theory , which identifies five key 
dimensions of personality: 1) extraversion, 2) neuroticism, 3) openness to experience, 4) 
conscientiousness, and 5) agreeableness  
SITUATIONAL APPROACH  
Certain situations and circumstances  can influence a person’s day in a positive or 
negative way. Depending on the circumstance, a normally positive person may become more 
negative. On the other hand, a traditionally pessimistic person may appear to be more positive.  
It is human nature for em otions and personalities to differ depending on what is happening in 
our lives.  
Even if we are not aware of what others may be going through, it is reasonable to 
assume that certain situations in the lives of all individuals impacts their personality.  If 
situations can influence personality and personality can predict behavior, then situational 
influences also contribute to predicting behavior.  In 1968, Walter Mischel published a book 
entitled  Personality & Assessment. In his book, Mischel argued that an interactionist approach 
was best suited when exploring personality, situations, and behavior. This interactionist 
approach believes that both personality and situational circumstances create behavior. In 
addition, Mischel explained that pers onalities tend to differ across a range of situations 
(personality at work versus home); however, they keep consistencies within similar situations 
(work meetings). This revelation created an upset in the traditional view of personality by 
arguing that per sonality stability and instability can each exist at the same time.  The Situational Approach to Personality  showcases behavior based specifically on a 
particular situation or environmental constraint. Psychologists look at an individual's 
observational lea rning and the learning aspects of social reinforcement seen as a result.  
  INTERACTIONAL APPROACH  
When a sports psychologist uses an interactional approach, they have to consider both 
situational determinants and personality traits exhibited by the individual.  The interactional 
approach considers both psychological traits and situational influences on behavior. The two 
aspects mix and can alter behavior. Your psychological traits and environmental influences 
interact and combine in unique ways to scu lpt your behavior.  
The Interactional Approach to psychology allows for a degree of interaction between 
states and traits. This approach seeks to to understand how behavior is influenced by both 
personality and social learning in the environment.  
USING PSY CHOLOGICAL MEASURES  
Personality measures  such as Myers Briggs Type Indicator, Insights, or Lumina Spark 
are the personality measures that most often get used in teams.  These provide an indication of 
people’s general personality tendencies, which can be he lpful to accelerate the learning about 
people working together for optimum team dynamics and results.  
Positive psychology measures  such as Realise2, Virtues in Action Survey of Character 
Strengths, Fordyce Emotions Questionnaire, BarOn Emotional Quotient I nventory, and Grit 
Survey are measures typically used for individual awareness and skill training.  These provide 
a snap shot of psychological skills and characteristics that focus on the promotion of strengths 
and the development of psychological skills t o maximise personal growth and performance.  
Mental health and well -being measures  such as Depression Anxiety Stress Scales 
(DASS), Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10), Satisfaction With Life Scale, and 
Rosenberg Self -Esteem Scale are measures used t o assess mental health and well -being 
indicators.  These can be used as screening tools at the beginning of the season and potentially 
throughout the year if relevant for some athletes.  
Performance skills measures  that either measure levels of skills such as Sport 
Confidence Inventory and Athlete Coping Skills Inventory or usage of psychological skills in 
sport such as Test of Performance Strategies are measures used to get an understanding of 
current level and/or usage for psychological skills training to match the mental demands of 
their specific sport’s requirements.  These are a great way to introduce psychological skills 
training into sports performance.  
All of the above -mentioned measures are self -report questionnaires with the aim of 
quantifying aspec ts of an athlete’s psychological traits and states, so of course they involve 
people assessing and rating their perception of themselves.  However, questionnaires are not 
the only way to evaluate psychological skills…  Observable behaviours  can also play a valuable role in developing a common language 
and monitoring of psychological skills in individuals and teams.  One of the most difficult 
things in creating consistent standards of elite performance, particularly when it comes to 
psychology, is measuring… However in the case of behaviours that we want to see around 
here, it simply means we need to articulate the types of behaviours through a qualification 
process (as opposed to typical quantification processes).  Qualification measurement is 
different to qu oting numbers, but it is relatively simple to define the behaviours you want to 
see.  For example, if we want to define whether people are bouncing back from mistakes on 
the football pitch, we can describe the types of actions we would see if people are do ing this 
successfully.  
Another effective skill training method we’ve used has been the integration of 
psychophysiological measures such as heart rate variability.  Questionnaires rely on perception 
whereas observable behaviours and psychophysiological measu res are closer to ‘black and 
white’.  
Measurement and monitoring is useful and provides guidance to progress, however it’s 
vital that the goal of the measurement is determined upfront.  All of these six categories of 
measures have their place in individual and team sport performance and can be used with great 
validity by professionals who understand how to administer, interpret, and utilise as a tool to 
assist athletes to perform to their potential.  
GUIDELINES FOR USING PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASURES  
 Most sport psy chology practitioners would agree that, as described earlier, gathering 
information about athletes’ thoughts and feelings does not always require a  validated 
psychological inventory. Inventories, however, have particular  value  in determining the 
sources of  performance dysfunction, performance impairment, and possible clinical treatment  . 
Determine the Inventory’s Purpose  
Inventory authors should clearly state the inventory’s purpose, why it was developed, and its 
intended function. Was it intended to merely obtain information or o describe a sample for 
demographic purposes? To address a research question  and to analyze dat a for research 
purposes? To test the  effectiveness of an intervention, strategy, or treatment? To diagnose 
a particular aspect  of the person’s current  mental state? To measure selected personal 
characteristics of the sample? Once  the purpose of the invento ry has been determined, 
consultants need to determine  whether that purpose meets their goals or needs.  
Confirm the Inventory’s Psychometric Properties  Is the measure valid and reliable? SPCs may conﬁdently determine that a measure  possesses 
acceptable psyc hometric properties by reading the original publication  of a measure, examining 
that measure’s manual, or relying on subsequent  research  that addresses the reliability and 
validity of the measure. Consultants need to pay  particular attention to evidence th at the 
inventory is reliable (e.g., shows accept -able .70 or higher levels of test -retest stability) and 
valid (e.g., shows construct  validity, is signiﬁcantly correlated with related measures, or  is not 
correlated with  measures with which it should be unr elated).  
Determine Objectives and the Conceptual Framework   
Before selecting an inventory and the research article from which it was generated  and 
validated, the SPC should identify the conceptual framework being studied  so that data 
analyses and results c an be generalized to other (similar) samples,  additional research 
questions, and other published studies in the literature.   
Determine  Whether the  Inventory Is  Intended to Assess  the Athlete Statistically or  to 
Compare the Athlete’s Scores  Against Norms  
Instruments may be used to gauge the relative strength or inﬂuence of various  traits on some 
outcome measure. Inventory users need to ascertain whether there  are standards or norms 
against which the athlete’s score will be compared, and if  these norms are va lid and compatible 
for the characteristics of the sample under  scrutiny. The availability of these norms greatly 
enhances the usefulness of an  inventory for consultation or research.  
Determine  the Inventory’s External Validity  
External validity “is the degree to which the conclusions (in the practitioner’s  study or data 
collection) would hold for other persons in other places and at other  times” (Trochim, 2001, p. 
42). Can  the inventory’s accuracy in  measuring what it is  supposed to measure be generalize d 
to other clients and samples? Is the inventory  useful and compatible with the needs of intended 
clients and for targeted speciﬁc  situations? Determining this information helps the inventory 
user specify whether,  and to what extent, the intervention or ﬁn dings can be generalized.  
Assess the Role of Inventory Scores in Consultation  Effectiveness  
SPCs should examine the extent  to which the inventory score(s) will promote more  effective 
consultation in  improving the athlete’s mental, emotional, or performance  status. Inventory 
scores may not be compatible with the athletes’ perceptions of  their “problem” and may 
circumvent the reason  they are seeking sport psychology  consultation.  
Obtain Prior Written Consent and Institutional Review Board  (IRB) Approval  
Is the athlete willing to  complete the inventory? In educational settings, has the SPC  received 
IRB approval and the athlete’s written consent (and for athletes younger  than 18, the parents’ written consent)? Can the athlete withdraw from completing  the invento ry or participating in 
the consulting process at any time without penalty?  If the athlete is unwilling  to complete an 
inventory, then the data’s integrity may be  compromised.  
Establish  Trust Between  the Consultant  and Athlete  
Have the issues of self -disclo sure, conﬁdentiality, candor, and trust been  addressed  with the 
athlete before or during inventory use? Will the athlete feel comfortable  responding accurately, 
honestly, and candidly to the consultant or clinician? Are  the athlete’s responses conﬁdential?  
Will the athlete’s coaches have access to the  data? Athletes must be assured that their responses 
will not be  inspected by anyone  other than the consultant.  
Be Sensitive to Group and Cultural Differences  
With respect to culture, as reviewed earlier, ident ify any unique characteristics of  inventory 
item content, scoring, and interpretation of scores that are different from  the data used when 
the inventory was constructed. Individual differences exist  among cultures and individual 
athletes on the willingness to disclose personal (and  “private”) information.   
Ensure Data Accuracy  
The interpretation of inventory scores should be absolute, with virtually no uncertainty 
about  interpreting those scores. Knowing, for instance, whether  the inventory  is measuring a 
psychological state or a trait  is important with respect to expecting  a change in scoring, or 
whether these are stable characteristics that may or may  not underlie the issue(s) under 
discussion.  
Interpret Scores With Norms  
Determine if norms exist that are  compatible with the athlete’s characteristics, sport  type, 
and objectives of inventory outcomes. An athlete’s scores could be  compared,  either intra - or 
inter-individually, against these norms to determine their rank or  percentile. Is there a “correct” 
score?  Is a score designated as high or low? Is there  a desirable or undesirable  score?  
COGNITIVE STRATEGIES AND SUCCESS  
It is becoming increasingly clear that there is a strong link between well -being and 
performance. Whether it is at work, in  the classroom, or on a playing field, our emotional and 
physical health has an impact on our ability to perform. For student -athletes, this is especially 
true. Implementing these strategies will help you perform at the highest level on and off your 
venue of competition.  
There are certain mental and  cognitive strategies  that athletes can use to help 
themselves with competition and  athletic success . Successful athletes show a number 
of cognitive  strategies, such as:  * regulating and managing arousal levels,  
* showing self -confidence,  
* using concentration and focus,  
* feeling in control and not forcing thing s, 
* using positive  imagery  and thought,  
* exercising commitment and determination,  
* setting goals,  
* having well -developed plans and well -developed coping str ategies  
BREATHING STRATEGIES  
Breathing is a function of life we rarely think about and comes to us as second nature. 
Nevertheless, focused breathing can have profound effects on your ability to relax, regulate 
your emotions, reduce anxiety, and distract your mind from potential negative thoughts. Every 
individual is different, however using some of these simple breathing exercises can help you 
benefit from deep mindful breathing in stressful situations.  
RELAXATION BREATHING  
The great thing about relaxation breathing is that it is a tool which you can use anywhere 
and anytime to help manage stress and emotion.  
COGNITIVE SKILLS AND STRATEGIES  
There are many things to focus on in life. Add in the pressures of being a student -athlete 
to the load  of an everyday college student and you can be overwhelmed. Nevertheless, helpful 
cognitive skills and strategies can be employed to process difficult times and achieve positive 
outcomes.  
COGNITIVE REFRAMING  
Cognitive reframing, also known as cognitive res tructuring, is a skill taught to 
individuals to notice negative and intrusive thoughts and actively work to challenge/change 
those thoughts.  
VISUALIZATION  
Another way to destress and relax is to visualize yourself in a peaceful, comfortable, 
inviting place . Visualization can be done in many environments and time frames.  
• Start with a relaxation breath or two to center yourself and focus on the moment.  
• Imagine yourself in the scene you have selected and slowly allow yourself to 
experience what you see, hear, smell, feel and possibly taste.  
• Imagine the scene over time, like watching the sun go down, and how the scene 
changes and what your senses experience as it changes.  • Once you decide to end the visualization, bring your focus back to your breath for 
a moment before moving on to the next thing you need to do.  
MUSCLE RELAXATION  
Progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) can help relax tired and stressed bodies and minds 
and prepare you for a good night of sleep.  This tool can be used when dealing with anxiety, 
stress, sleep difficulties, depression, and overall well being. Learning how to relax is a skill 
which can be used in any situation. Just as it takes time and practice to learn skills for your 
sport, PMR takes time and practice, but the benefits can be expo nentially rewarding. This 
activity is most effective when you can carve out 15 to 30 minutes of time with minimal 
distractions. Bedtime can be ideal, but there are other times when it can be effective and it can 
be done both lying down and seated.  
IDENTIFY ING ROLE IN UNDERSTANDING PERSONALITY  
Everyone has different preferences that make up their personality type, and some 
personalities work better together than others. Your particular personality type might make it 
really easy to work with one colleague and leave you struggling with another. Understanding 
personality type can help you to understand your preferences and the preferences of other 
people and how or why these might be different.  Personality types are useful for recognising 
how we lea d, influence, communicate, collaborate, negotiate business and manage stress.  
Our personality types — along with different work ethics, opinions, and approaches — 
make it difficult to get along perfectly with everyone all the time. However, being aware of 
your own personality style makes you more likely to observe the traits of those around you. 
This allows you to adapt your style to theirs or provide them with information in a way that 
will get their attention, which can go a long way in helping y ou understand yourself, as well as 
your colleagues!  
BENEFITS OF UNDERSTA NDING ONE’S ROLE IN PERSONALITY  
Know your preferences.  We all have our own psychological type preferences, and operating 
within these preferences typically allows us to be most effici ent, effective, and our most 
comfortable selves. Conversely, operating outside these limits requires more time and energy 
and usually results in lower quality work. Understanding these boundaries — and knowing 
when you’re within or outside them — can impro ve your productivity, efficiency, and time 
management skills.  
Avoid conflict.  Understanding your personality type can diffuse conflicts before they arise. If 
you know you tend to have a knee -jerk reaction when a problem arises, you can adjust this 
behavior and be more receptive to the situation. Conversely, if you’re usually quick to accept responsibility for a problem — even if it’s not your fault — you can train yourself to be more 
analytical and evaluate the situation before determining how to address it.  
Appreciate diversity . Recognizing how your personality type differs from an d interacts with 
others’ types can give you a great appreciation for diversity and what it adds to your team, 
work environment, and company. Sometimes it’s really nice to have that outrageously creative 
mind helping you generate ideas for solving a problem  when you’ve hit a roadblock yourself.  
Find the right career.  Your personality type plays a big role in whether you’re suited for a 
particular career, how well you perform your daily responsibilities, and even your overall job 
satisfaction. Understanding p ersonality type helps you find the right career for you. For 
instance, if you are very extroverted, you likely won’t fare well in a position where you don’t 
interact with people. Meanwhile, an introvert probably isn’t going to be as satisfied in a 
customer  service position.  
Improve decision -making abilities . How you make decisions is based on your sensing versus 
intuition preference. If you are a sensing person, you’re more likely to feel out a situation before 
making a choice. You engage all five senses to  gather the right information. If you’re more 
reliant on intuition, you will probably make a choice based on instinct. Tend to go with your 
gut? Try to better assess the choice at hand before making a decision. On the flip side, if you’re 
a sensing person,  don’t over analyze the external factors to the point of paralyzing your decision 
making abilities altogether.  
The theory behind personality type is that we are born with, live with, and die with our 
type. It will develop and evolve over time. We might cho ose to use it differently or apply it 
differently depending on our experiences. But it will usually remain the same throughout our 
lives. By understanding personality types more fully, you can learn to appreciate your strengths 
and recognize your weaknesse s, as well as those of the people around you.  
 